Mearsheimer, J.J. (2001). The tragedy of great power politics. New York: W.W. 
 
 Norton & Company. 
 
Chapter One 
Introduction 
 
Many in the West seem to believe that "perpetual peace" among the great powers is finally 
at hand. The end of the Cold War, so the argument goes, marked a sea change in how great powers interact with one another. We have entered a world in which there is little chance that 
the major powers will engage each other in security competition, much less war, which has 
become an obsolescent enterprise. In the words of one famous author, the end of the Cold War 
has brought us to the "the end of history."
1 
This perspective suggests that great powers no longer view each other as potential military 
rivals, but instead as members of a family of nations, members of what is sometimes called the 
"international community." The prospects for cooperation are abundant in this promising new 
world, a world which is likely to bring increased prosperity and peace to all the great powers. 
Even a few adherents of realism, a school of thought that has his torically held pessimistic views 
about the prospects for peace among the great powers, appear to have bought into the reigning optimism, as reflect ed in an article from the mid -1990s titled "Realists as Optimi sts."
2 
Alas, the claim that security competition and war between the great powers have been 
purged from the international system is wrong. Indeed, there is much evidence that the promise of everlasting peace among the great powers was stillborn. Consider, for example, that even 
though the Soviet threat has disappeared, the United States still maintains about one hundred thousand troops in Europe and roughly the same number in Northeast Asia. It does so because 
it recognizes that dangerous rivalries would pr obably emerge among the major powers in these 
regions if U.S. troops were withdrawn. Moreover, almost every European state, includ ing the 
United Kingdom and France, still harbors deep -seated, albeit muted, fears that a Germany 
unchecked by American pow er might behave aggressively; fear of Japan in Northeast Asia is 
probably even more profound, and it is certainly more frequentl y expressed. Finally, the 
possi bility of a clash between China and the United States over Taiwan is hard ly remote. This is 
not to say that such a war is likely, but the possibility reminds us that the threat of great -power 
war has not disappeared. 
The sad fact is that international politics has always been a ruthless and dangerous 
business, and it is likely to remain that way. Alt hough the intensity of their competition waxes 
and wanes, great powers fear each other and always compete with each other for power. The 
overriding goal of each state is to maximize its share of world power, which means gain ing 
power at the expense of other states. But great powers do not merely strive to be the strongest 
of all the great powers, although that is a wel come outcome. Their ultimate aim is to be the 
hegemon— that is, the only great power in the system. 
There are no status quo powers in the international system, save for the occasional 
hegemon that wants to maintain its dominating position over potential rivals. Great powers are 
rarely content with the current dis tribution of power; on the contrary, they face a constant 
incentive to change it in their favor. They almost always have revisionist intentions, and they will use force to alter the balance of power if they think it can be done at a reasonable price.
3 At 
times, the costs and risks of trying to shift the balance of power are too great, forcing great 
powers to wait for more favorable circumstances. But the desire for more power does not go 
away, unless a state achieves the ultimate goal of hegemony. Since no state is likely to achieve 
global hegemony, however, the world is condemned to perpetual great -power competition. 
This unrelenting pursuit of power means that great powers are inclined to look for 
opportunities to alter the distribution of world power in their favor. They will seize these 
opportunities if they have the necessary capa bility. Simply put, great powers are primed for 
offense. But not only does a great power seek to gain power at the expense of other states, it also tries to thwart rivals bent on gaining power at its expense. Thus, a great power will defend 
the balance of power when looming change favors another state, and it will try to undermine the balance when the direction of change is in its own favor. 
Why do great powers behave this way? My answer is that the structure of the international 
system forces states which seek only to be secure nonetheless to act aggressively toward each 
other. Three features of the international system combine to cause states to fear one another: 1) 
the absence of a central authority that sits above states and can protect them from each other, 2) the fact that states always have some offensive mili tary capability, and 3) the fact that states 
can never be certain about other states' intentions. Given this fear —which can never be wholly 
eliminat ed—states recognize that the more powerful they are relative to their rivals, the better 
their chances of survival. Indeed, the best guarantee of survival is to be a hegemon, because no other state can seriously threaten such a mighty power. 
This situation, which no one consciously designed or intended, is gen uinely tragic. Great 
powers that have no reason to fight each other —that are merely concerned with their own 
survival —nevertheless have little choice but to pursue power and to seek to dominate the other 
states in the system. This dilemma is captured in brutally frank comments that Prussian statesman Otto von Bismarck made during the early 1860s, when it appeared that Poland, 
which was not an independent state at the time, might regain its sovereignty. "Restoring the 
Kingdom of Poland in any shape or form is tantamount to creating an ally for any enemy that 
chooses to attack us," he believed, and therefore he advocated that Prussia should "smash 
those Poles till, losing all hope, they lie down and die; I have every sympathy for their situation, 
but if we wish to survive we have no choice but to wipe them out."
4 
Although it is depressing to realize that great powers might think and act this way, it 
behooves us to see the world as it is, not as we would like it to be. For example, one of the key 
foreign policy issues facing the United States is the question of how China will behave if its rapid 
economic growth continues and effectively turns China into a giant Hong Kong. Many 
Americans believe that if China is democratic and enmeshed in the global capitalist system, it 
will not act aggressively; instead it will be con tent with the status quo in Northeast Asia. 
According to this logic, the United States should engage China in order to promote the latter's integration into the world economy, a poli cy that also seeks to encourage China's transition to 
democracy. If engagement succeeds, the United States can work with a wealthy and democratic China to promote peace around the globe. 
Unfortunately, a policy of engagement is doomed to fail. If China bec omes an economic 
powerhouse it will almost certainly translate its economic might into military might and make a 
run at dominating Northeast Asia. Whether China is democratic and deeply enmeshed in the 
global economy or autocratic and autarkic will have li ttle effect on its behavior, because 
democracies care about security as much as non- democracies do, and hegemony is the best 
way for any state to guarantee its own survival. Of course, neither its neighbors nor the United 
States would stand idly by while C hina gained increasing increments of power. Instead, they 
would seek to contain China, probably by trying to form a balancing coalition. The result would 
be an intense security competition between China and its rivals, with the ever -present danger of 
great -power war hanging over them. In short, China and the United States are des tined to be 
adversaries as China's power grows. 
 
 
 
 
Offensive Realism 
 
This book offers a realist theory of international politics that challenges the prevailing 
optimism about rel ations among the great powers. That enterprise involves three particular 
tasks. 
I begin by laying out the key components of the theory, which I call "offensive realism." I 
make a number of arguments about how great pow ers behave toward each other, emphasizing 
that they look for opportunities to gain power at each others' expense. Moreover, I identify the 
conditions that make conflict more or less likely. For example, I argue that multipolar systems 
are more war -prone than are bipolar systems, and that multipolar systems that contain 
especially powerful states —potential hegemons —are the most dangerous systems of all. But I 
do not just assert these various claims; I also attempt to provide compelling explanations for the behaviors and the outcomes that lie at the heart of the theory. In other words, I lay out the 
causal logic, or reasoning, which underpins each of my claims. 
The theory focuses on the great powers because these states have the largest impact on 
what happens in international politics.
5 The fortunes of all states —great powers and smaller 
powers alike—are determined prima rily by the decisions and actions of those with the greatest 
capability. For example, politics in almost every region of the world were deeply influenced by 
the competition between the Soviet Union and the United States between 1945 and 1990. The 
two world wars that preceded the Cold War had a similar effect on regional politics around the 
world. Each of these conflicts was a great -power rivalry, and each cast a long shadow over 
every part of the globe. 
Great powers are determined largely on the basis of their relative mili tary capability. To 
qualify as a great power, a state must have sufficient military assets to put up a serious fight in 
an all -out conventional war against the most powerful state in the world.6 The candidate need 
not have the capability to defeat the leading state, but it must have some reasonable prospect of 
turning the conflict into a war of attrition that leaves the dominant state seriously weakened, 
even if that dominant state ulti mately wins the war. In the nuclear age great powers must have a 
nuclear deterrent that can survive a nuclear strike against it, as well as formidable conventional 
forces. In the unlikely event that one state gained nuclear superiority over all of its rivals, it 
would be so powerful that it would be the only great power in the system. The balance of 
conventional forces would be largely irrelevant if a nuclear hegemon were to emerge. 
My second task in this book is to show tha t the theory tells us a lot about the history of 
international politics. The ultimate test of any theory is how well it explains events in the real 
world, so I go to considerable lengths to test my arguments against the historical record. 
Specifically, the focus is on great -power relations from the start of the French Revolutionary and 
Napoleonic Wars in 1792 until the end of the twenti eth century.7 Much attention is paid to the 
European great powers because they dominated world politics for most of the past two hundred years. Indeed, until Japan and the United States achieved great -power status in 1895 and 1898, 
respectively, Europe was home to all of the world's great powers. Nevertheless, the book also includes substantial discussion of the politics of Northeast Asia, especially regarding imperial 
Japan between 1895 and 1945 and China in the 1990s. The United States also figures 
prominently in my efforts to test offensive realism against past events. 
Some of the important historical puzzles that I attempt to shed light on include the following: 
 1) What accounts for the three longest and bloodiest wars in mod ern history —the French 
Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars (1792- 1815), World War I (1914- 18), and World War II 
(1939- 45)— conflicts that involved all of the major powers in the system? 
2) What accounts for the long periods of relative peace in Europe between 1816 and 1852, 
1871 and 1913, and especially 1945 and 1990, during the Cold War? 
3) Why did the United Kingdom, which was by far the wealthiest st ate in the world during the 
mid-nineteenth century, not build a powerful military and try to dominate Europe? In other 
words, why did it behave differently from Napoleonic France, Wilhelmine Germany, Nazi 
Germany, and the Soviet Union, all of which trans lated their economic might into military might 
and strove for European hegemony? 
4) Why was Bismarckian Germany (1862- 90) especially aggressive between 1862 and 
1870, fighting two wars with other great powers and one war with a minor power, but hardly 
aggressive at all from 1871 until 1890, when it fought no wars and generally sought to maintain the European status quo? 
5) Why did the United Kingdom, France, and Russia form a balanc ing coalition against 
Wilhelmine Germany before World War I, but fail to org anize an effective alliance to contain 
Nazi Germany? 
6) Why did Japan and the states of Western Europe join forces with the United States 
against the Soviet Union in the early years of the Cold War, even though the United States 
emerged from World War II w ith the most powerful economy in the world and a nuclear 
monopoly? 
7) What explains the commitment of American troops to Europe and Northeast Asia during 
the twentieth century? For example, why did the United States wait until April 1917 to join World 
War I, rather than enter the war when it broke out in August 1914? For that matter, why did the 
United States not send troops to Europe before 1914 to prevent the outbreak of war? Similiarly, why did the United States not balance against Nazi Germany in the 1930s or send troops to 
Europe before September 1939 to prevent the outbreak of World War II? 
8) Why did the United States and the Soviet Union continue building up their nuclear 
arsenals after each had acquired a secure sec ond-strike capability against the other? A world in 
which both sides have an "assured destruction" capability is generally considered to be stable 
and its nuclear balance difficult to overturn, yet both superpowers spent billions of dollars and 
rubles trying to gain a first -strike advantage. 
 
Third, I use the theory to make predictions about great -power politics in the twenty -first 
century. This effort may strike some readers as foolhardy, because the study of international relations, like the other social sciences, rests on a shakier theoretical foundation than that of the 
natural sciences. Moreover, political phenomena are highly complex; hence, precise politi cal 
predictions are impossible without theoretical tools that are superior to those we now possess. 
As a result, all political f orecasting is bound to include some error. Those who venture to predict, 
as I do here, should therefore proceed with humility, take care not to exhibit unwarranted 
confidence, and admit that hindsight is likely to reveal surprises and mistakes. Despite these 
hazards, social scientists should nevertheless use their theories to make predictions about the 
future. Making predictions helps inform policy discourse, because it helps make sense of events 
unfolding in the world around us. And by clarifying points of disagreement, making explicit 
forecasts helps those with contradictory views to frame their own ideas more clearly. 
Furthermore, trying to anticipate new events is a good way to test social science theories, 
because theorists do not have the bene fit of h indsight and therefore cannot adjust their claims 
to fit the evidence (because it is not yet available). In short, the world can be used as a laboratory to decide which theories best explain international politics. In that spirit, I employ 
offensive realis m to peer into the future, mindful of both the benefits and the hazards of trying to 
predict events. 
 The Virtues and Limits of Theory 
 It should be apparent that this book is self -consciously theoretical. But out side the walls of 
academia, especially in the policy world, theory has a bad name. Social science theories are 
often portrayed as the idle speculations of head- in-the-clouds academics that have little 
relevance to what goes on in the "real world." For example, Paul Nitze, a prominent American 
foreign -policy maker du ring the Cold War, wrote, "Most of what has been written and taught 
under the heading of 'political science' by Americans since World War II has been ... of limited value, if not counterproductive, as a guide to the actual conduct of policy."
8 In this view, theory 
should fall almost exclusively within the purview of academics, whereas policymakers should 
rely on common sense, intuition, and practical experience to carry out their duties. 
This view is wrongheaded. In fact, none of us could understand the world we live in or make 
intelligent decisions without theories. Indeed, all students and practitioners of international 
politics rely on theories to comprehend their surroundings. Some are aware of it and some are 
not, some admit it and some do not; but there is no escaping the fact that we could not make 
sense of the complex world around us without simplify ing theories. The Clinton administration's 
foreign policy rhetoric, for example, was heavily informed by the three main liberal theories of 
international relations: 1) the claim that prosperous and economically interdependent states are 
unlikely to fight each other, 2) the claim that democracies do not fight each other, and 3) the 
claim that international institutions enable states to avoid war and concentrate instead on 
build ing cooperative relationships. 
Consider how Clinton and company justified expanding the member ship of the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO) in the mid- 1990s. President Clinton maintained that one of the 
chief goals of expansion was "locking in democracy's gains in Central Europe," because 
"democracies resolve their differences peacefully." He also argued that the United States should 
foster an "open trading system," because "our security is tied to the sta ke other nations have in 
the prosperity of staying free and open and working with others, not working against them."9 
Strobe Talbott, Clinton's Oxford classmate and deputy secretary of state, made the same claims 
for NATO enlargement: "With the end of the cold war, it has become possible to construct a 
Europe that is increasingly united by a shared commitment to open societies and open 
markets." Moving the borders of NATO east ward, he maintained, would help "to solidify the 
national consensus for democrati c and market reforms" that already existed in states like 
Hungary and Poland and thus enhance the prospects for peace in the region.10 
In the same spirit, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright praised NATO's founders by saying 
that "[t]heir basic achievement was to begin the construction of the . . . network of rule- based 
institutions and arrangements that keep the peace." "But that achievement is not com plete," she 
warned, and "our challenge today is to finish the post -war con struction project . . . [and ] expand 
the area of the world in which American interests and values will thrive."11 
These examples demonstrate that general theories about how the world works play an 
important role in how policymakers identify the ends they seek and the means they choose to 
achieve them. Yet that is not to say we should embrace any theory that is widely held, no matter 
how popular it may be, because there are bad as well as good theories. For example, some 
theories deal with trivial issues, while others are opaque and almost impossible to comprehend. 
Furthermore, some theories have contradictions in their underlying logic, while others have little 
explana tory power because the world simply does not work the way they predict. The trick is to 
distinguish between sound theories and defective ones.12 My aim is to persuade readers that 
offensive realism is a rich theory which sheds considerable light on the workings of the 
international system. 
As with all theories, however, there are limits to offensive realism's explanatory power. A few 
cases contradict the main claims of the theory, cases that offensive realism should be able to 
explain but cannot. All theories face this problem, although the better the theory, the fewer the 
anomalies. 
An example of a case that contradicts offensive realism involves Germany in 1905. At the 
time Germany was the most powerful state in Europe. Its main rivals on the continent were France and Russia, which some fifteen years earlier had formed an alliance to contain the 
Germans. The United Kingdom had a tiny army at the time because it was counting on France 
and Russia to keep Germany at bay. When Japan unexpectedly inflicted a devastating defeat 
on Russia between 1904 and 1905, which temporarily knocked Russia out of the European 
balance of power, France was left standing virtually alone against mighty Germany. Here was 
an excellent opportunity for Germany to crush France and take a giant step toward achieving hegemony in Europe. It surely made more sense for Germany to go to war in 1905 than in 1914. But Germany did not even seriously consider going to war in 1905, which contradicts what 
offensive realism would predict. 
Theories encounter anomalies because they simplify reality by empha sizing certain factors 
while ignoring others. Offensive realism assumes that the international system strongly shapes 
the behavior of states. Structural factors such as anarchy and the distribution of power, I argue, 
are what matter most for explaining international politics. The theory pays little attention t o 
individuals or domestic political considerations such as ideol ogy. It tends to treat states like 
black boxes or billiard oalls. For example, it does not matter for the theory whether Germany in 
1905 was led by Bismarck, Kaiser Wilhelm, or Adolf Hitler, or whether Germany was dem ocratic 
or autocratic. What matters for the theory is how much relative power Germany possessed at 
the time. These omitted factors, however, occasionally dominate a state's decision- making 
process; under these cir cumstances, off ensive realism is not going to perform as well. In short, 
there is a price to pay for simplifying reality. 
Furthermore, offensive realism does not answer every question that arises in world politics, 
because there will be cases in which the theory is consi stent with several possible outcomes. 
When this occurs, other theories have to be brought in to provide more precise explanations. 
Social sci entists say that a theory is "indeterminate" in such cases, a situation that is not 
unusual with broad- gauged theories like offensive realism. 
An example of offensive realism's indeterminacy is that it cannot account for why the 
security competition between the superpowers dur ing the Cold War was more intense between 
1945 and 1963 than between 1963 and 1990.
13 The t heory also has little to say about whether 
NATO should have adopted an offensive or a defensive military strategy to deter the Warsaw 
Pact in central Europe.14 To answer these questions it is neces sary to employ more fine -grained 
theories, such as deterre nce theory. Nevertheless, those theories and the answers they spawn 
do not contra dict offensive realism; they supplement it. In short, offensive realism is like a 
powerful flashlight in a dark room: even though it cannot illumi nate every nook and cranny, most 
of the time it is an excellent tool for navigating through the darkness. 
It should be apparent from this discussion that offensive realism is mainly a descriptive 
theory. It explains how great powers have behaved in the past and how they are likely to behave in the future. But it is also a pre scriptive theory. States should behave according to the 
dictates of offensive realism, because it outlines the best way to survive in a dangerous world. 
One might ask, if the theory describes how great powers act, why is it necessary to stipulate 
how they should act? The imposing constraints of the system should leave great powers with 
little choice but to act as the theory predicts. Although there is much truth in this description of great powers as prisoners t rapped in an iron cage, the fact remains that they sometimes —
although not often—act in contradiction to the theory. These are the anomalous cases discussed above. As we shall see, such foolish behavior invariably has negative consequences. 
In short, if the y want to survive, great powers should always act like good offensive realists. 
 
The Pursuit of Power 
 
Enough said about theory. More needs to be said about the substance of my arguments, 
which means zeroing in on the core concept of "power." For all reali sts, calculations about 
power lie at the heart of how states think about the world around them. Power is the currency of 
great -power politics, and states compete for it among themselves. What money is to economics, 
power is to international relations. 
This book is organized around six questions dealing with power. First, why do great powers 
want power? What is the underlying logic that explains why states compete for it? Second, how 
much power do states want? How much power is enough? These two questions ar e of 
paramount importance because they deal with the most basic issues concern ing great -power 
behavior. My answer to these foundational questions, as emphasized above, is that the structure of the international system encourages states to pursue hegemony. 
Third, what is power? How is that pivotal concept defined and meas ured? With good 
indicators of power, it is possible to determine the power levels of individual states, which then 
allows us to describe the architec ture of the system. Specifically, we c an identify which states 
qualify as great powers. From there, it is easy to determine whether the system is hegemonic 
(directed by a single great power), bipolar (controlled by two great powers), or multipolar 
(dominated by three or more great powers). Fur thermore, we will know the relative strengths of 
the major powers. We are especially interested in knowing whether power is distributed more or less evenly among them, or if there are large power asymmetries. In particular, does the system 
contain a potent ial hegemon—a great power that is considerably stronger than any of its rival 
great powers? 
Defining power clearly also gives us a window into understanding state behavior. If states 
compete for power, we learn more about the nature of that competition if we understand more 
fully what power is, and there fore what states are competing for. In short, knowing more about 
the true nature of power should help illuminate how great powers compete among themselves. 
Fourth, what strategies do states pursue to gain p ower, or to maintain it when another great 
power threatens to upset the balance of power? Blackmail and war are the main strategies that 
states employ to acquire power, and balancing and buck -passing are the principal strategies 
that great powers use to maintain the distribution of power when facing a dangerous rival. With 
balancing, the threatened state accepts the burden of deterring its adversary and commits 
substantial resources to achieving that goal. With buck -passing, the endangered great power 
tries to get another state to shoulder the burden of deterring or defeating the threatening state. 
The final two questions focus on the key strategies that states employ to maximize their 
share of world power. The fifth is, what are the causes of war? Specific ally, what power -related 
factors make it more or less likely that security competition will intensify and turn into open conflict? Sixth, when do threatened great powers balance against a dangerous adversary and 
when do they attempt to pass the buck to ano ther threatened state? 
I will attempt to provide clear and convincing answers to these ques tions. It should be 
emphasized, however, that there is no consensus among realists on the answers to any of 
them. Realism is a rich tradition with a long history, and disputes over fundamental issues have 
long been commonplace among realists. In the pages that follow, I do not consider alternative 
realist theories in much detail. I will make clear how offensive realism differs from its main realist 
rivals, and I wil l challenge these alter native perspectives on particular points, mainly to elucidate 
my own argu ments. But no attempt will be made to systematically examine any other realist 
theory. Instead, the focus will be on laying out my theory of offen sive realis m and using it to 
explain the past and predict the future. 
Of course, there are also many nonrealist theories of international poli tics. Three different 
liberal theories were mentioned earlier; there are other nonrealist theories, such as social 
construct ivism and bureaucratic politics, to name just two. I will briefly analyze some of these 
theories when I look at great -power politics after the Cold War (Chapter 10), mainly because 
they underpin many of the claims that international poli tics has undergone a fundamental 
change since 1990. Because of space limitations, however, I make no attempt at a 
comprehensive assessment of these nonrealist theories. Again, the emphasis in this study will 
be on making the case for offensive realism. 
Nevertheless, it makes good sense at this point to describe the theories that dominate 
thinking about international relations in both the academic and policy worlds, and to show how 
offensive realism compares with its main realist and nonrealist competitors. 
 
Liberalism vs. Realism 
 Liberalism and realism are the two bodies of theory which hold places of privilege on the 
theoretical menu of international relations. Most of the great intellectual battles among international relations scholars take place either across the divide between realism and 
liberalism, or within those paradigms.
15 To illustrate this point, consider the three most influen tial 
realist works of the twentieth century: 
 
1) E. H. Carr's The Twenty Years' Crisis, 1919- 1939, which was published in the United 
Kingdom shortly after World War II started in Europe (1939) and is still widely read today. 
2) Hans Morgenthau's Politics among Nations, which was first pub lished in the United States 
in the early days of the Cold War (1948) and dominated the field of int ernational relations for at 
least the next two decades. 
3) Kenneth Waltz's Theory of International Politics, which has dominat ed the field since it 
first appeared during the latter part of the Cold War. 
 
 All three of these realist giants critique some as pect of liberalism in their writings. For 
example, both Carr and Waltz take issue with the liberal claim that economic interdependence 
enhances the prospects for peace.17 More generally, Carr and Morgenthau frequently criticize 
liberals for holding Utopian views of politics which, if followed, would lead states to disaster. At 
the same time, these realists also disagree about a number of important issues. Waltz, for 
example, challenges Morgenthau's claim that multipolar systems are more stable than bipolar 
systems.18 Furthermore, whereas Morgenthau argues that states strive to gain power because 
they have an innate desire for power, Waltz maintains that the structure of the international 
system forces states to pursue power to enhance their prospects for sur vival. These examples 
are just a small sam ple of the differences among realist thinkers.19 
Let us now look more closely at liberalism and realism, focusing first on the core beliefs 
shared by the theories in each paradigm, and second on the differences am ong specific liberal 
and realist theories. 
 
Liberalism 
 
The liberal tradition has its roots in the Enlightenment, that period in eighteenth- century 
Europe when intellectuals and political leaders had a powerful sense that reason could be 
employed to make t he world a better place.20 Accordingly, liberals tend to be hopeful about the 
prospects of making the world safer and more peaceful. Most liberals believe that it is possible 
to substantially reduce the scourge of war and to increase inter national prosper ity. For this 
reason, liberal theories are sometimes labelled "Utopian" or "idealist." 
Liberalism's optimistic view of international politics is based on three core beliefs, which are 
common to almost all of the theories in the para digm. First, liberals c onsider states to be the 
main actors in international politics. Second, they emphasize that the internal characteristics of states vary considerably, and that these differences have profound effects on state behavior.
21 
Furthermore, liberal theorists often believe that some internal arrangements (e.g., democracy) 
are inherently preferable to oth ers (e.g. dictatorship. For liberals, therefore, there are "good" and 
"bad" states in the international system. Good states pursue cooperative policies and hardly 
ever start wars on their own, whereas bad states cause con flicts with other states and are prone 
to use force to get their way.22 Thus, the key to peace is to populate the world with good states. 
Third, liberals believe that calculations about power matter little for explaining the behavior 
of good states. Other kinds of political and eco nomic calculations matter more, although the 
form of those calculations varies from theory to theory, as will become apparent below. Bad 
states might be motivated by the desire to gain power at the expense of other states, but that is 
only because they are misguided. In an ideal world, where there are only good states, power 
would be largely irrelevant. 
Among the various theories found under the big tent of liberalism, the three main ones 
mentioned earlier are particularly influential. The first argues that high levels of economic interdependence among states make them unlikely to fight each other.
23 The taproot of stability, 
according to this theory, is the creation and maintenance of a liberal economic order that allows for free economic exchange among states. Such an order makes states more prosperous, 
thereby bolstering peace, because prosperous states are more economically satisfied and 
satisfied states are more peace ful. Many wars are waged to gain or preserve wealth, but states 
have much less motive to initiate war if they are already wealthy. Furthermore, wealthy states with interdependent economies stand to become less pros perous if they fight each other, since 
they are biting the hand that feeds them. Once states establish extensive economic ties, in 
short, they avoid war and can concentrate instead on accumulating wealth. 
The second, democratic peace theory, claims that democracies do not go to war against 
other democracies.
24 Thus, a world containing only democratic states would be a world without 
war. The argument here is not that democracies are less warlike than non- democracies, but 
rather that democracies do not fight among themselves. There are a variety of explanations for 
the democratic peace, but little agreement as to which one is correct. Liberal thinkers do agree, 
however, that democratic peace theory offers a direct challenge to realism and provides a 
powerful recipe for peace. 
Finally, some liberals ma intain that international institutions enhance the prospects for 
cooperation among states and thus significantly reduce the likelihood of war.25 Institutions are 
not independent political entities that sit above states and force them to behave in acceptabl e 
ways. Instead, institutions are sets of rules that stipulate the ways in which states should 
cooperate and compete with each other. They prescribe acceptable forms of state behavior and 
proscribe unacceptable kinds of behavior. These rules are not imposed on states by some 
leviathan, but are negotiated by states, which agree to abide by the rules they created because 
it is in their interest to do so. Liberals claim that these institutions or rules can funda mentally 
change state behavior. Institutions, so the argument goes, can discourage states from 
calculating self -interest on the basis of how their every move affects their relative power 
position, and thus they push states away from war and promote peace. 
 Realism 
 
In contrast to liberals, realists are pessimists when it comes to internation al politics. Realists 
agree that creating a peaceful world would be desirable, but they see no easy way to escape the harsh world of security competi tion and war. Creating a peaceful world is surely an attractive 
idea, but it is not a practical one. "Realism," as Carr notes, "tends to emphasize the irresistible 
strength of existing forces and the inevitable character of exist ing tendencies, and to insist that 
the highest wisdom lies in accepting, and adapting onesel f to these forces and these 
tendencies."
26 
This gloomy view of international relations is based on three core beliefs. First, realists, like 
liberals, treat states as the principal actors in world politics. Realists focus mainly on great powers, however, because these states dominate and shape international politics and they also 
cause the deadliest wars. Second, realists believe that the behavior of great pow ers is 
influenced mainly by their external environment, not by their inter nal characteristics. The 
structure of the international system, which all states must deal with, largely shapes their foreign 
policies. Realists tend not to draw sharp distinctions between "good" and "bad" states, because 
all great powers act according to the same logic regardless of their culture, political system, or 
who runs the government.27 It is therefore difficult to discriminate among states, save for 
differences in relative power. In essence, great powers are like billiard balls that vary only in size.
28 
Third, realists hold that calculations about power dominate states' thinking, and that states 
compete for power among themselves. That com petition sometimes necessitates going to war, 
which is considered an acceptable instrument of statecraft. To quote Carl von Clausewit z, the 
nineteenth- century military strategist, war is a continuation of politics by other means.29 Finally, 
a zero- sum quality characterizes that competition, sometimes making it intense and unforgiving. 
States may cooperate with each other on occasion, bu t at root they have conflicting interests. 
Although there are many realist theories dealing with different aspects of power, two of them 
stand above the others: human nature realism, which is laid out in Morgenthau's Politics among 
Nations, and defensive r ealism, which is presented mainly in Waltz's Theory of International 
Politics. What sets these works apart from those of other realists and makes them both 
important and controversial is that they provide answers to the two foundational questions 
described above. Specifically, they explain why states pursue power —that is, they have a story 
to tell about the causes of security competition—and each offers an argument about how much 
power a state is likely to want. 
Some other famous realist thinkers concentrat e on making the case that great powers care 
deeply about power, but they do not attempt to explain why states compete for power or what level of power states deem satisfac tory. In essence, they provide a general defense of the 
realist approach, but they do not offer their own theory of international politics. The works of 
Carr and American diplomat George Kennan fit this description. In his seminal realist tract, The 
Twenty Years' Crisis, Carr criticizes liberalism at length and argues that states are moti vated 
principally by power consider ations. Nevertheless, he says little about why states care about 
power or how much power they want.
30 Bluntly put, there is no theory in his book. The same 
basic pattern obtains in Kennan's well -known book American Diplo macy, 1900- 1950.31 
Morgenthau and Waltz, on the other hand, offer their own theories of international relations, 
which is why they have dominated the discourse about world politics for the past fifty years. 
Human nature realism, which is sometimes called "classical realism," dominated the study of 
international relations from the late 1940s, when Morgenthau's writings began attracting a large 
audience, until the early 1970s.32 It is based on the simple assumption that states are led by 
human beings who hav e a "will to power" hardwired into them at birth.33 That is, states have an 
insatiable appetite for power, or what Morgenthau calls "a limitless lust for power," which means 
that they constantly look for opportunities to take the offensive and dominate other states.34 All 
states come with an "animus dominandi," so there is no basis for discriminating among more 
aggressive and less aggressive states, and there certainly should be no room in the theory for status quo states.
35 Human nature realists recognize that international anarchy —the absence of 
a governing authority over the great powers —causes states to worry about the balance of 
power. But that structural constraint is treated as a second- order cause of state behavior. The 
principal driving force in int ernational politics is the will to power inherent in every state in the 
system, and it pushes each of them to strive for supremacy. 
Defensive realism, which is frequently referred to as "structural real ism," came on the scene 
in the late 1970s with the appearance of Waltz's Theory of International Politics.36 Unlike 
Morgenthau, Waltz does not assume that great powers are inherently aggressive because they 
are infused with a will to power; instead he starts by assuming that states merely aim to survive. 
Above all else, they seek security. Nevertheless, he maintains that the structure of the 
international system forces great powers to pay careful attention to the balance of power. In 
particular, anarchy forces security -seeking states to compete with each other for power, 
because power is the best means to survival. Whereas human nature is the deep cause of 
secu rity competition in Morgenthau's theory, anarchy plays that role in Waltz's theory.37 
Waltz does not emphasize, however, that the international system provides great powers 
with good reasons to act offensively to gain power. Instead, he appears to make the opposite 
case: that anarchy encourages states to behave defensively and to maintain rather than upset 
the balance of power. "The first concern of states," he writes, is "to maintain their position in the 
system."38 There seems to be, as international relations the orist Randall Schweller notes, a 
"status quo bias" in Waltz's theory.39 
Waltz recognizes that states have incentives to gain power at their rivals' expense and that it 
makes good strategic sense to act on that motive when the time is right. But he does not 
develop that line of argument in any detail. On the contrary, he emphasizes that when great 
powers behave aggressively, the potential victi ms usually balance against the aggressor and 
thwart its efforts to gain power.40 For Waltz, in short, bal ancing checkmates offense.41 
Furthermore, he stresses that great powers must be careful not to acquire too much power, 
because "excessive strength" is likely to cause other states to join forces against them, thereby 
leaving them worse off than they would have been had they refrained from seeking additional 
increments of power.42 
Waltz's views on the causes of war further reflect his theory's status quo bias. There are no 
profound or deep causes of war in his theory. In particular, he does not suggest that there might 
be important benefits to be gained from war. In fact, he says little about the causes of war, other 
than to argue that wars are largely the result of uncertainty and miscalcu lation. In other words, if 
states knew better, they would not start wars. 
Robert Jervis, Jack Snyder, and Stephen Van Evera buttress the defen sive realists' case by 
focusing attention on a structural concept known as t he offense -defense balance.43 They 
maintain that military power at any point in time can be categorized as favoring either offense or 
defense. If defense has a clear advantage over offense, and conquest is therefore diffi cult, great 
powers will have little incentive to use force to gain power and will concentrate instead on 
protecting what they have. When defense has the advantage, protecting what you have should 
be a relatively easy task. Alternatively, if offense is easier, states will be sorely tempted to try 
conquering each other, and there will be a lot of war in the system. Defensive realists argue, however, that the offense- defense balance is usually heavily tilted toward defense, thus making 
conquest extremely difficult.
44 In sum, efficient balanci ng coupled with the natural advantages of 
defense over offense should discourage great powers from pursuing aggressive strate gies and 
instead make them "defensive positionalists."45 
My theory of offensive realism is also a structural theory of internation al politics. As with 
defensive realism, my theory sees great powers as con cerned mainly with figuring out how to 
survive in a world where there is no agency to protect them from each other; they quickly realize 
that power is the key to their survival. Of fensive realism parts company with defensive realism 
over the question of how much power states want. For defensive realists, the international 
structure provides states with little incentive to seek additional increments of power; instead it 
pushes them t o maintain the existing balance of power. Preserving power, rather than 
increasing it, is the main goal of states. Offensive realists, on the other hand, believe that status quo powers are rarely found in world politics, because the international system cr eates powerful 
incentives for states to look for opportunities to gain power at the expense of rivals, and to take advantage of those situations when the benefits outweigh the costs. A state's ultimate goal is to be the hegemon in the system.
46 
It should be apparent that both offensive realism and human nature realism portray great 
powers as relentlessly seeking power. The key differ ence between the two perspectives is that 
offensive realists reject Morgenthau's claim that states are naturally endowed with Type A per -
sonalities. On the contrary, they believe that the international system forces great powers to maximize their relative power because that is the optimal way to maximize their security. In 
other words, survival mandates aggressive behavior. Great powers behave aggressively not 
because they want to or because they possess some inner drive to dominate, but because they 
have to seek more power if they want to maximize their odds of survival. (Table 1.1 summarizes how the main realist theories answer the foundational questions described above.) 
No article or book makes the case for offensive realism in the sophisti cated ways that 
Morgenthau does for human nature realism and Waltz and others do for defensive realism. For sure, some realists have argued that the system gives great powers good reasons to act 
aggressively. Probably the best brief for offensive realism is a short, obscure book writ ten during 
World War I by G. Lowes Dickinson, a British academic who was an early advocate of the 
League of Nations.
47 In The European Anarchy, he argues that the root cause of World War I 
"was not Germany nor any other power. The real culprit was the European anarchy," which 
created powerful incentives for states "to acquire supremacy over the others for mo tives at once 
of security and domination."48 Nevertheless, neither Dickinson nor anyone else makes a 
comprehensive case for offensive real ism.49 My aim in writing this book is to fill that void. 
 
Power Politics in Liberal America 
 
Whatever merits realism may have as an explanation for real -world politics and as a guide 
for formulating foreign policy, it is not a popular school of thought in the West. Realism's central 
message —that it makes good sense for states to selfishly pursue power —does not have broad 
appeal. It is difficult to imagine a modern political leader openly ask ing the public to fight and die 
to improve the balance of power. No European or American leader did so during either world 
war or the Cold War. Most people prefer to think of fights between their own state and rival 
states as clashes between good and evil, where they are on the side of the angels and their 
opponents are aligned with the devil. Thus, leaders tend to portray war as a moral crusade or an 
ideological contest, rather than as a struggle for power. Realism is a hard sell. 
Americans appear to have an especial ly intense antipathy toward bal ance- of-power thinking. 
The rhetoric of twentieth- century presidents, for example, is filled with examples of realism 
bashing. Woodrow Wilson is probably the most well -known example of this tendency, because 
of his elo quent campaign against balance -of-power politics during and immediately after World 
War I.50 Yet Wilson is hardly unique, and his successors have fre quently echoed his views. In 
the final year of World War II, for example, Franklin Delano Roosevelt declared, "In the future 
world the misuse of power as implied in the term 'power polities' must not be the controlling 
factor in international relations."51 More recently, Bill Clinton offered a strikingly similar view, 
proclaiming that "in a world where freedom, not tyranny, is on the march, the cynical calculus of pure power politics simply does not compute. It is ill -suited to a new era."
52 He sounded the 
same theme when defending NA TO expansion in 1997, arguing that the charge that this policy 
might isolate Russia was based on the mistaken belief "that the great power territorial politics of the 20th century will dominate the 21st century." Instead, Clinton emphasized his belief that 
"enlightened self -interest, as well as shared values, will compel countries to define their great -
ness in more constructive ways . . . and will compel us to cooperate."
53 
 
Why Americans Dislike Realism 
 
Americans tend to be hostile to realism because it clashes with their basic values. Realism 
stands opposed to Americans' views of both themselves and the wider world.54 In particular, 
realism is at odds with the deep- seated sense of optimism and moralism that pervades much of 
American society. Liberalis m, on the other hand, fits neatly with those values. Not surprisingly, 
foreign policy discourse in the United States often sounds as if it has been lifted right out of a Liberalism 101 lecture. 
Americans are basically optimists.55 They regard progress in politics, whether at the national 
or the international level, as both desirable and possible. As the French author Alexis de 
Tocqueville observed long ago, Americans believe that "man is endowed with an indefinite 
faculty of improvement ."56 Realism, by contrast, offers a pessimistic perspective on international 
politics. It depicts a world rife with security competition and war, and holds out little promise of 
an "escape from the evil of power, regardless of what one does."57 Such pessim ism is at odds 
with the power ful American belief that with time and effort, reasonable individuals can cooperate 
to solve important social problems.58 Liberalism offers a more hopeful perspective on world 
politics, and Americans naturally find it more att ractive than the gloomy specter drawn by 
realism. 
Americans are also prone to believe that morality should play an important role in politics. 
As the prominent sociologist Seymour Martin Lipset writes, "Americans are Utopian moralists 
who press hard to ins titutionalize virtue, to destroy evil people, and eliminate wicked institutions 
and practices."59 This perspective clashes with the realist belief that war is an intrinsic element 
of life in the international system. Most Americans tend to think of war as a hideous enterprise 
that should ultimately be abolished from the face of the Earth. It might justifiably be used for lofty liberal goals like fighting tyranny or spreading democracy, but it is morally incorrect to fight wars 
merely to change or preserve the balance of power. This makes the Clausewitzian conception 
of warfare anathema to most Americans.
60 
The American proclivity for moralizing also conflicts with the fact that realists tend not to 
distinguish between good and bad states, but instead dis criminate between states largely on the 
basis of their relative power capabilities. A purely realist interpretation of the Cold War, for example, allows for no meaningful difference in the motives behind American and Soviet behavior during that conflict. Ac cording to realist theory, both sides were driven by their 
concerns about the balance of power, and each did what it could to maximize its relative power. Most Americans would recoil at this interpretation of the Cold War, however, because they 
believe the United States was motivated by good intentions while the Soviet Union was not 
Liberal theorists do distinguish between good and bad states, of course, and they usually 
identify liberal democracies with market economies as the most worthy. Not surprisingly , 
Americans tend to like this perspective, because it identifies the United States as a benevolent force in world pol itics and portrays its real and potential rivals as misguided or malevolent 
troublemakers. Predictably, this line of thinking fueled the euphoria that attended the downfall of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War. When the "evil empire" collapsed, many 
Americans (and Europeans) con cluded that democracy would spread across the globe and that 
world peace would soon break out. This opt imism was based largely on the belief that 
democratic America is a virtuous state. If other states emulated the United States, therefore, the 
world would be populated by good states, and this development could only mean the end of 
international conflict. 
 
Rhetoric vs. Practice 
 Because Americans dislike realpolitik, public discourse about foreign poli cy in the United 
States is usually couched in the language of liberalism. Hence the pronouncements of the policy 
elites are heavily flavored with optimism and moralism. American academics are especially 
good at pro moting liberal thinking in the marketplace of ideas. Behind closed doors, however, 
the elites who make national security policy speak mostly the language of power, not that of 
principle, and the Unit ed States acts in the international system according to the dictates of 
realist logic.
61 In essence, a discernible gap separates public rhetoric from the actual conduct of 
American foreign policy. 
Prominent realists have often criticized U.S. diplomacy on the grounds that it is too idealistic 
and have complained that American leaders pay insufficient attention to the balance of power. 
For example, Kennan wrote in 1951, "I see the most serious fault of our past policy formulation 
to lie in something that I m ight call the legalistic -moralistic approach to interna tional problems. 
This approach runs like a red skein through our foreign policy of the last fifty years."62 According 
to this line of argument, there is no real gap between America's liberal rhetoric and its foreign 
policy behavior, because the United States practices what it preaches. But this claim is wrong, 
as I will argue at length below. American foreign policy has usually been guided by realist logic, 
although the public pronouncements of its le aders might lead one to think otherwise. 
It should be obvious to intelligent observers that the United States speaks one way and acts 
another. In fact, policymakers in other states have always remarked about this tendency in 
American foreign policy. As long ago as 1939, for example, Carr pointed out that states on the 
European continent regard the English- speaking peoples as "masters in the art of concealing 
their selfish national interests in the guise of the general good," adding that "this kind of 
hypoc risy is a special and characteris tic peculiarity of the Anglo- Saxon mind."63 
Still, the gap between rhetoric and reality usually goes unnoticed in the United States itself. 
Two factors account for this phenomenon. First, realist policies sometimes coincide with the 
dictates of liberalism, in which case there is no conflict between the pursuit of power and the 
pursuit of prin ciple. Under these circumstances, realist policies can be justified with liberal 
rhetoric without having to discuss the underlying p ower realities. This coincidence makes for an 
easy sell. For example, the United States fought against fascism in World War II and communism in the Cold War for largely realist reasons. But both of those fights were also 
consistent with liberal principles, and thus policymakers had little trouble selling them to the 
public as ideological conflicts. 
Second, when power considerations force the United States to act in ways that conflict with 
liberal principles, "spin doctors" appear and tell a story that accor ds with liberal ideals.
64 For 
example, in the late nineteenth century, American elites generally considered Germany to be a progres sive constitutional state worthy of emulation. But the American view of Germany 
changed in the decade before World War I, as relations between the two states deteriorated. By 
the time the United States declared war on Germany in April 1917, Americans had come to see Germany as more autocratic and militaristic than its European rivals. 
Similarly, during the late 1930s, many Amer icans saw the Soviet Union as an evil state, 
partly in response to Josef Stalin's murderous internal policies and his infamous alliance with 
Nazi Germany in August 1939. Nevertheless, when the United States joined forces with the 
Soviet Union in late 1941 to fight against the Third Reich, the U.S. government began a massive 
public relations campaign to clean up the image of America's new ally and make it compatible 
with liberal ideals. The Soviet Union was now portrayed as a proto -democracy, and Stalin 
became "Uncle Joe." 
How is it possible to get away with this contradiction between rhetoric and policy? Most 
Americans readily accept these rationalizations because liberalism is so deeply rooted in their 
culture. As a result, they find it easy to believe that they are acting according to cherished 
principles, rather than cold and calculated power considerations.
65 
 
The Plan of the Book 
 
The rest of the chapters in this book are concerned mainly with answering the six big 
questions about power which I identified earli er. Chapter 2, which is probably the most important 
chapter in the book, lays out my theory of why states compete for power and why they pursue hegemony. 
In Chapters 3 and 4, I define power and explain how to measure it. I do this in order to lay 
the groundwork for testing my theory. It is impossible to determine whether states have behaved 
according to the dictates of offensive realism without knowing what power is and what different 
strategies states employ to maximize their share of world power. My start ing point is to 
distinguish between potential power and actual military power, and then to argue that states 
care deeply about both kinds of power. Chapter 3 focuses on potential power, which involves 
mainly the size of a state's population and it s wealth. Chapter 4 deals with actual mil itary power. 
It is an especially long chapter because I make arguments about "the primacy of land power" and "the stopping power of water" that are novel and likely to be controversial. 
In Chapter 5, I discuss the strategies that great powers employ to gain and maintain power. 
This chapter includes a substantial discussion of the utility of war for acquiring power. I also 
focus on balancing and buck -passing, which are the main strategies that states employ when 
faced with a rival that threatens to upset the balance of power. 
In Chapters 6 and 7, I examine the historical record to see whether there is evidence to 
support the theory. Specifically, I compare the con duct of the great powers from 1792 to 1990 to 
see whether their behavior fits the predictions of offensive realism. 
In Chapter 8, I lay out a simple theory that explains when great powers balance and when 
they choose to buck -pass, and then I examine that the ory against the historical record. Chapter 
9 focuses on the causes of war. Here, too, I lay out a simple theory and then test it against the 
empirical record. 
Chapter 10 challenges the oft -made claim that international politics has been fundamentally 
transformed with the end of the Cold War, and that great powers no longer compete with each other for power. I briefly assess the theories underpinning that optimistic perspective, and then I 
look at how the great powers have behaved in Europe and Northeast Asia between 1991 and 
2000. Finally, I make predic tions about the likelihood of great -power conflict in these two 
important regions in the early twenty -first century. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Two 
Anarchy and the Struggle for Power 
 
Great power, I argue, are always searching for opportunities to gain power over their rivals, 
with hegemony as their final goal. This perspective does not allow for status quo powers, except 
for the unusual state that achieves preponderance. Instead, the system is populated wit h great 
powers that have revisionist intentions at their core.1 This chapter presents a theory that 
explains this competition for power. Specifically, I attempt to show that there is a compelling 
logic behind my claim that great powers seek to maximize their share of world power. I do not, 
however, test offensive realism against the historical record in this chapter. That important task 
is reserved for later chapters. 
 
Why States Pursue Power 
 
My explanation for why great powers vie with each other for power and strive for hegemony 
is derived from five assumptions about the international system. None of these assumptions 
alone mandates that states behave competitively. Taken together, however, they depict a world 
in which states have considerable reason to think and sometimes behave aggressively. In 
particular, the system encourages states to look for opportunities to maximize their power vis -à-
vis other states. 
How important is it that these assumptions be realistic? Some social sci entists argue that 
the assumptions that underpin a theory need not conform to reality. Indeed, the economist 
Milton Friedman maintains that the best theories "will be found to have assumptions that are wildly inaccu rate descriptive representations of reality, and, in general, the more signif icant the 
theory, the more unrealistic the assumptions."
2 According to this view, the explanatory power of 
a theory is all that matters. If unrealistic assumptions lead to a theory that tells us a lot about 
how the world works, it is of no importance whether the underlying assumptions are realistic or 
not. 
I reject this view. Although I agree that explanatory power is the ulti mate criterion for 
assessing theories, I also believe that a theory based on unrealistic or false assumptions wil l not 
explain much about how the world works.3 Sound theories are based on sound assumptions. 
Accordingly, each of these five assumptions is a reasonably accurate representation of an 
important aspect of life in the international system. 
 
Bedrock Assumptions 
The first assumption is that the international system is anarchic, which does not mean that it 
is chaotic or riven by disorder. It is easy to draw that conclusion, since realism depicts a world 
characterized by security compe tition and war. By itself, however, the realist notion of anarchy 
has noth ing to do with conflict; it is an ordering principle, which says that the system comprises 
independent states that have 'no central authority above them.
4 Sovereignty, in other words, 
inheres in states because there is no higher ruling body in the international system.5 There is no 
"government over governments."6 
The second assumption is that great powers inherently possess some offensive military 
capability, which gives them the wherewithal to hurt and possi bly destroy each other. States are 
potentially dangerous to each other, although some states have more military might than others 
and are therefore more dangerous. A state's military power is usually identified with the 
particular weaponry at its disposal, although even if there were no weapons, the individuals in 
those states could still use their feet and hands to attack the population of another state. After 
all, for every neck, there are two hands to choke it. 
The third assumption is that states can never be certain about other states' intentions. 
Specifically, no state can be sure that another state will not use its offensive military capability to 
attack the first state. This is not to say that states necessarily have hostile intentions. Indeed, all 
of the states in the system may be reliably benign, but it is impossible to be sure of that judgment because intentions are impossible to divine with 100 percent cer tainty.
7 There are 
many possible causes of aggression, and no state can be sure that anot her state is not 
motivated by one of them.8 Furthermore, intentions can change quickly, so a state's intentions 
can be benign one day and hostile the next. Uncertainty about intentions is unavoidable, which 
means that states can never be sure that other st ates do not have offensive intentions to go 
along with their offensive capabilities. 
The fourth assumption is that survival is the primary goal of great pow ers. Specifically, 
states seek to maintain their territorial integrity and the autonomy of their domestic political 
order. Survival dominates other motives because, once a state is conquered, it is unlikely to be 
in a posi tion to pursue other aims. Soviet leader Josef Stalin put the point well during a war 
scare in 1927: "We can and must build socialis m in the [Soviet Union]. But in order to do so we 
first of all have to exist."9 States can and do pursue other goals, of course, but security is their 
most impor tant objective. 
The fifth assumption is that great powers are rational actors. They are aware of their 
external environment an d they think strategically about how to survive in it. In particular, they 
consider the preferences of other states and how their own behavior is likely to affect the 
behavior of those other states, and how the behavior of t hose other states is likely to affect their 
own strategy for survival. Moreover, states pay attention to the long term as well as the immediate consequences of their actions. 
As emphasized, none of these assumptions alone dictates that great powers as a general 
rule should behave aggressively toward each other. There is surely the possibility that some 
state might have hostile intentions, but the only assumption dealing with a specific motive that is 
common to all states says that their principal objective is to survive, which by itself is a rather harmless goal. Nevertheless, when the five assumptions are married together, they create powerful incentives for great powers to think and act offensively with regard to each other. In 
particular, three general patterns of behavior result: fear, self -help, and power maximization. 
 State Behavior 
 
Great powers fear each other. They regard each other with suspicion, and they worry that 
war might be in the offing. They anticipate danger. There is little room for trust among states. 
For sure, the level of fear varies across time and space, but it cannot be reduced to a trivial 
level. Prom the per spective of any one great power, all other great powers are potential 
enemies. This point is illustrated by the reaction of t he United Kingdom and France to German 
reunification at the end of the Cold War. Despite the fact that these three states had been close 
allies for almost forty -five years, both the United Kingdom and France immediately began 
worrying about the potential dangers of a united Germany.
10 
The basis of this fear is that in a world where great powers have the capability to attack 
each other and might have the motive to do so, any state bent on survival must be at least 
suspicious of other states and reluc tant to trust them. Add to this the "911" problem —the 
absence of a cen tral authority to which a threatened state can turn for help—and states have 
even greater incentive to fear each other. Moreover, there is no mechanism, other than the 
possible self -interest o f third parties, for pun ishing an aggressor. Because it is sometimes 
difficult to deter potential aggressors, states have ample reason not to trust other states and to 
be prepared for war with them. 
The possible consequences of falling victim to aggression further ampli fy the importance of 
fear as a motivating force in world politics. Great pow ers do not compete with each other as if 
international politics were merely an economic marketplace. Political competition among states 
is a much more dangerous business than mere economic intercourse; the former can lead to 
war, and war often means mass killing on the battlefield as well as mass murder of civilians. In extreme cases, war can even lead to the destruction of states. The horrible consequences of 
war s ometimes cause states to view each other not just as competitors, but as potentially 
deadly enemies. Political antagonism, in short, tends to be intense, because the stakes are 
great. 
States in the international system also aim to guarantee their own sur vival. Because other 
states are potential threats, and because there is no higher authority to come to their rescue 
when they dial 911, states can not depend on others for their own security. Each state tends to 
see itself as vulnerable and alone, and there fore it aims to provide for its own sur vival. In 
international politics, God helps those who help themselves. This emphasis on self -help does 
not preclude states from forming alliances.
11 But alliances are only temporary marriages of 
convenience: today's alliance partner might be tomorrow's enemy, and today's enemy might be 
tomorrow's alliance partner. For example, the United States fought with China and the Soviet 
Union against Germany and Japan in World War II, but soon thereafter flip -flopped enemies and 
partners and allied with West Germany and Japan against China and the Soviet Union during the Cold War. 
States operating in a self -help world almost always act according to their own self -interest 
and do not subordinate their interests to the inter ests of other states, or to the interests of the 
so-called international com munity. The reason is simple: it pays to be selfish in a self -help 
world. This is true in the short term as well as in the long term, because if a state loses in the 
short run, it migh t not be around for the long haul. 
Apprehensive about the ultimate intentions of other states, and aware that they operate in a 
self-help system, states quickly understand that the best way to ensure their survival is to be the 
most powerful state in the system. The stronger a state is relative to its potential rivals, the less 
likely it is that any of those rivals will attack it and threaten its survival. Weaker states will be 
reluctant to pick fights with more powerful states because the weaker states ar e likely to suffer 
military defeat. Indeed, the bigger the gap in power between any two states, the less likely it is 
that the weaker will attack the stronger. Neither Canada nor Mexico, for example, would 
countenance attacking the United States, which is far more powerful than its neighbors. The 
ideal situation is to be the hegemon in the system. As Immanuel Kant said, "It is the desire of 
every state, or of its ruler, to arrive at a condition of perpetual peace by conquering the whole 
world, if that were possible."
12 Survival would then be almost guaranteed.13 
Consequently, states pay close attention to how power is distributed among them, and they 
make a special effort to maximize their share of world power. Specifically, they look for 
opportunities to alter the balance of power by acquiring additional increments of power at the 
expense of potential rivals. States employ a variety of means —economic, diplomatic, and 
military —to shift the balance of power in their favor, even if doing so makes other states 
suspicious or even hostile. Because one state's gain in power is another state's loss, great powers tend to have a zero- sum men tality when dealing with each other. The trick, of course, is 
to be the win ner in this competition and to dominate the other s tates in the system. Thus, the 
claim that states maximize relative power is tantamount to arguing that states are disposed to 
think offensively toward other states, even though their ultimate motive is simply to survive. In 
short, great powers have aggress ive intentions.
14 
Even when a great power achieves a distinct military advantage over its rivals, it continues 
looking for chances to gain more power. The pursuit of power stops only when hegemony is 
achieved. The idea that a great power might feel secure without dominating the system, 
provided it has an "appropriate amount" of power, is not persuasive, for two reasons.15 First, it is 
difficult to assess how much relative power one state must have over its rivals before it is secure. Is twice as much power an appropriate threshold? Or is three times as much power the 
magic number? The root of the problem is that power calculations alone do not determine which 
side wins a war. Clever strategies, for example, sometimes allow less pow erful states to defeat 
more powerful foes. 
Second, determining how much power is enough becomes even more complicated when 
great powers contemplate how power will be distributed among them ten or twenty years down the road. The capabilities of individual states vary over time, som etimes markedly, and it is often 
difficult to predict the direction and scope of change in the balance of power. Remember, few in 
the West anticipated the collapse of the Soviet Union before it happened. In fact, during the first half of the Cold War, many in the West feared that the Soviet economy would eventually 
generate greater wealth than the American economy, which would cause a marked power shift 
against the United States and its allies. What the future holds for China and Russia and what the balanc e of power will look like in 2020 is difficult to foresee. 
Given the difficulty of determining how much power is enough for today and tomorrow, great 
powers recognize that the best way to ensure their security is to achieve hegemony now, thus 
eliminating a ny possibili ty of a challenge by another great power. Only a misguided state would 
pass up an opportunity to be the hegemon in the system because it thought it already had 
sufficient power to survive.
16 But even if a great power does not have the wherewit hal to achieve 
hegemony (and that is usually the case), it will still act offensively to amass as much power as it 
can, because states are almost always better off with more rather than less power. In short, 
states do not become status quo powers until the y com pletely dominate the system. 
All states are influenced by this logic, which means that not only do they look for 
opportunities to take advantage of one another, they also work to ensure that other states do 
not take advantage of them. After all, rival states are driven by the same logic, and most states are likely to rec ognize their own motives at play in the actions of other states. In short, states 
ultimately pay attention to defense as well as offense. They think about conquest themselves, 
and they work to check aggressor states from gaining power at their expense. This inexorably 
leads to a world of con stant security competition, where states are willing to lie, cheat, and use 
brute force if it helps them gain advantage over their rivals. Peace, if one defines that concept as a state of tranquility or mutual concord, is not like ly to break out in this world. 
The "security dilemma," which is one of the most well -known concepts in the international 
relations literature, reflects the basic logic of offensive realism. The essence of the dilemma is 
that the measures a state takes to increase its own security usually decrease the security of other states. Thus, it is difficult for a state to increase its own chances of survival without 
threatening the survival of other states. John Herz first introduced the security dilemma in a 
1950 article in the journal World Politics.
11 After dis cussing the anarchic nature of international 
politics, he writes, "Striving to attain security from . . . attack, [states ] are driven to acquire more 
and more power in order to escape the impact of the power of others. This, in turn, renders the 
others more insecure and compels them to prepare for the worst. Since none can ever feel 
entirely secure in such a world of competi ng units, power competition ensues, and the vicious 
circle of secu rity and power accumulation is on."18 The implication of Herz's analysis is clear: the 
best way for a state to survive in anarchy is to take advantage of other states and gain power at 
their expense. The best defense is a good offense. Since this message is widely understood, 
ceaseless security com petition ensues. Unfortunately, little can be done to ameliorate the 
securi ty dilemma as long as states operate in anarchy. 
It should be apparen t from this discussion that saying that states are power maximizers is 
tantamount to saying that they care about relative power, not absolute power. There is an important distinction here, because states concerned about relative power behave differently 
than do states interested in absolute power.
19 States that maximize relative power are 
concerned primarily with the distribution of material capabilities. In particular, they try to gain as 
large a power advantage as possible over potential rivals, because power is the best means to 
survival in a danger ous world. Thus, states motivated by relative power concerns are likely to 
forgo large gains in their own power, if such gains give rival states even greater power, for 
smaller national gains that nevertheless provide them with a power advantage over their rivals.20 
States that maximize absolute power, on the other hand, care only about the size of their own 
gains, not those of other states. They are not motivated by balance- of-power logic but instead 
are conce rned with amassing power without regard to how much power other states control. 
They would jump at the opportunity for large gains, even if a rival gained more in the deal. 
Power, according to this logic is not a ……………………… 
 
Calculated Aggression 
 
There is obviously little room for status quo powers in a world where states are inclined to 
look for opportunities to gain more power. Nevertheless, great powers cannot always act on 
their offensive inten tions, because behavior is influenced not only by what stat es want, but also 
by their capacity to realize these desires. Every state might want to be king of the hill, but not every state has the wherewithal to compete for that lofty position, much less achieve it. Much 
depends on how military might is distributed among the great powers. A great power that has a 
marked power advantage over its rivals is likely to behave more aggres sively, because it has 
the capability as well as the incentive to do so. 
By contrast, great powers facing powerful opponents will be less inclined to consider 
offensive action and more concerned with defending the existing balance of power from threats by their more powerful opponents. Let there be an opportunity for those weaker states to revise 
the balance in their own favor, however, and they will take advantage of it. Stalin put the point 
well at the end of World War II: "Everyone imposes his own system as far as his army can 
reach. It cannot be otherwise."
22 States might also have the capability to gain advantage over a 
rival power but nevertheless decide that the perceived costs of offense are too high and do not 
justify the expected benefits. 
In short, great powers are not mindless aggressors so bent on gaining power that they 
charge headlong into losing wars or pursue Pyrrhic victories. On the contrary, before great powers take offensive actions, they think carefully about the balance of power and about how 
other states will react to their moves. They weigh the costs and risks of offense against the likely 
benefits. If the benefits do not outweigh the risks, they sit tight and wait for a more propitious 
moment. Nor do states start arms races that are unlikely to improve their overall position. As 
discussed at greater length in Chapter 3, states sometimes limit defense spending eithe r 
because spend ing more would bring no strategic advantage or because spending more would 
weaken the economy and undermine the state's power in the long run.
23 To paraphrase C lint 
Eastwood, a state has to know its limitations to survive in the international system. 
Nevertheless, great powers miscalculate from time to time because they invariably make 
important decisions on the basis of imperfect informa tion. States hardly ever have complete 
information about any situation they c onfront. There are two dimensions to this problem. 
Potential adver saries have incentives to misrepresent their own strength or weakness, and to 
conceal their true aims.24 For example, a weaker state trying to deter a stronger state is likely to 
exaggerate its own power to discourage the potential aggressor from attacking. On the other 
hand, a state bent on aggression is likely to emphasize its peaceful goals while exaggerating its 
military weakness, so that the potential victim does not build up its own ar ms and thus leaves 
itself vulnerable to attack. Probably no national leader was better at practicing this kind of 
deception than Adolf Hitler. 
But even if disinformation was not a problem, great powers are often unsure about how their 
own military forces, as well as the adversary's, will perform on the battlefield. For example, it is 
sometimes difficult to determine in advance how new weapons and untested combat units will 
perform in the face of enemy fire. Peacetime maneuvers and war games are helpful but imperfect indicators of what is likely to happen in actual combat. Fighting wars is a complicated 
business in which it is often diffi cult to predict outcomes. Remember that although the United 
States and its allies scored a stunning and remarkably easy vi ctory against Iraq in early 1991, 
most experts at the time believed that Iraq's military would be a formidable foe arid put up 
stubborn resistance before finally succumbing to American military might.25 
Great powers are also sometimes unsure about the resolve of opposing states as well as 
allies. For example, Germany believed that if it went to war against France and Russia in the 
summer of 1914, the United Kingdom would probably stay out of the fight. Saddam Hussein 
expected the United States to stand aside when he invaded Kuwait in August 1990. Both 
aggres sors guessed wrong, but each had good reason to think that its initial judgment was 
correct. In the 1930s, Adolf Hitler believed that his great -power rivals would be easy to exploit 
and isolate because each had little interest in fighting Germany and instead was determined to get someone else to assume that burden. He guessed right. In short, great powers constantly 
find themselves confronting situations in which they have to make impor tant decisions wi th 
incomplete information. Not surprisingly, they some times make faulty judgments and end up 
doing themselves serious harm. 
Some defensive realists go so far as to suggest that the constraints of the international 
system are so powerful that offense rarel y succeeds, and that aggressive great powers 
invariably end up being punished.
26 As noted, they emphasize that 1) threatened states balance 
against aggressors and ultimately crush them, and 2) there is an offense -defense balance that 
is usually heavily til ted toward the defense, thus making conquest especially difficult. Great 
powers, therefore, should be content with the existing bal ance of power and not try to change it 
by force. After all, it makes little sense for a state to initiate a war that it is l ikely to lose; that 
would be self -defeating behavior. It is better to concentrate instead on preserving the balance of 
power.27 Moreover, because aggressors seldom succeed, states should understand that 
security is abundant, and thus there is no good strat egic reason for wanting more power in the 
first place. In a world where conquest seldom pays, states should have relatively benign 
intentions toward each other. If they do not, these defensive realists argue, the reason is 
probably poisonous domestic polit ics, not smart calculations about how to guarantee one's 
security in an anarchic world. 
There is no question that systemic factors constrain aggression, espe cially balancing by 
threatened states. But defensive realists exaggerate those restraining forces.28 Indeed, the 
historical record provides little sup port for their claim that offense rarely succeeds. One study 
estimates that there were 63 wars between 1815 and 1980, and the initiator won 39 times, 
which translates into about a 60 percent success rate .29 Turning to specific cases, Otto von 
Bismarck unified Germany by winning military victories against Denmark in 1864, Austria in 
1866, and France in 1870, and the United States as we know it today was created in good part 
by conquest in the nineteenth century. Conquest certainly paid big dividends in these cases. 
Nazi Germany won wars against Poland in 1939 and France in 1940, but lost to the Soviet 
Union between 1941 and 1945. Conquest ultimately did not pay for the Third Reich, but if Hitler 
had restrai ned himself after the fall of France and had not invaded the Soviet Union, conquest 
probably would have paid handsomely for the Nazis. In short, the historical record shows that 
offense sometimes succeeds and some times does not. The trick for a sophisticated power 
maximizer is to figure out when to raise and when to fold.30 
 
Hegemony’s Limits 
 
Great powers, as I have emphasized, strive to gain power over their rivals and hopefully 
become hegemons. Once a state achieves that exalted position, it becomes a s tatus quo power. 
More needs to be said, however, about the meaning of hegemony. 
A hegemon is a state that is so powerful that it dominates all the other states in the 
system.31 No other state has the military wherewithal to put up a serious fight against it. In 
essence, a hegemon is the only great power in the system. A state that is substantially more 
powerful than the other great powers in the system is not a hegemon, because it faces, by 
defini tion, other great powers. The United Kingdom in the mid- nineteenth century, for example, 
is sometimes called a hegemon. But it was not a hegemon, because there were four other great powers in Europe at the time—Austria, France, Prussia, and Russia—and the United Kingdom 
did not dominate them in any meaningful way. In fact, during that period, the United Kingdom considered France to be a serious threat to the balance of power. Europe in the nineteenth 
century was multipolar, not unipolar . 
Hegemony means domination of the system; which is usually interpret ed to mean the entire 
world. It is possible, however, to apply the concept of a system more narrowly and use it to 
describe particular regions, such as Europe, Northeast Asia, and the We stern Hemisphere. 
Thus, one can distinguish between global hegemons, which dominate the world, and regional 
hegemons, which dominate distinct geographical areas. The United States has been a regional 
hegemon in the Western Hemisphere for at least the past one hundred years. No other state in 
the Americas has suffi cient military might to challenge it, which is why the United States is 
widely recognized as the only great power in its region. 
My argument, which I develop at length in subsequent chapters, is t hat except for the 
unlikely event wherein one state achieves clear -cut nuclear superiority, it is virtually impossible 
for any state to achieve global hege mony. The principal impediment to world domination is the 
difficulty of projecting power across the world's oceans onto the territory of a rival great power. 
The United States, for example, is the most powerful state on the planet today. But it does not 
dominate Europe and Northeast Asia the way it does the Western Hemisphere, and it has no 
intention of trying to conquer and control those distant regions, mainly because of the stopping 
power of water. Indeed, there is reason to think that the American mili tary commitment to 
Europe and Northeast Asia might wither away over the next decade. In short, there has never 
been a global hegemon, and there is not likely to be one anytime soon. 
The best outcome a great power can hope for is to be a regional hege mon and possibly 
control another region that is nearby and accessible over land. The United States is the only 
regional hegemon in modern his tory, although other states have fought major wars in pursuit of 
regional hegemony: imperial Japan in Northeast Asia, and Napoleonic France, Wilhelmine 
Germany, and Nazi Germany in Europe. But none succeeded. The Soviet Union, which is 
located in Europe and Northeast Asia, threat ened to dominate both of those regions during the 
Cold War. The Soviet Union might also have attempted to conquer the oil -rich Persian Gulf 
region, with which it shared a border. But even if Mos cow had been able to dominate Europe, 
Northeast Asia, and the Persian Gulf, which it never came close to doing, it still would have been unable to conquer the Western Hemisphere and become a true global hegemon. 
States that achieve regional hegembny seek to prevent great powers in other regions from 
duplicating their feat. Regional hegemons, in other words, do not want peers. Thus the United 
States, for example, played a key role in preventing imperial Japan, Wilhelmine Germany, Nazi 
Germany, and the Soviet Union from gaining regional supremacy. Regional hegemons attempt 
to check aspiring hegemons in other regions because they fear that a rival great power that 
dominates its own region will be an especially powerful foe that is essentially free to cause 
trouble in the fearful great power's backyard. Regional hegemons prefer that there be at least 
two great powers located together in other regions, because their proximity will force them to concentrate their attention on each other rather than on the distant hegemon. 
Furthermore, if a potential hegemon emerges among them, the other great powers in that 
region might be able to contain it by themselves, allowing the distant hegemon to remain safely on the sidelines. Of course, if the local great powers were unable to do the job, the distant 
hegemon would take the appropriate measures to deal with the threatening state. The United 
States, as noted, has assumed that burden on four separate occasions in the twentieth century, 
which is why it is commonly referred to as an "offshore balancer." 
In sum, the ideal situation for any great power is to be the only region al hegemon in the 
world. That state would be a status quo power, and it would go to considerable lengths to 
preserve the existing distribution of power. The United States is in that enviable position today; it 
dominates the Western Hemisphere and there is no hegemon in any other area of the world. But if a regional hegemon is confronted with a peer competi tor, it would no longer be a status 
quo power. Indeed, it would go to con siderable lengths to weaken and maybe even destroy its 
distant rival. Of course, both regional hegemons would be motivated by that logic, which would make for a fierce security competition between them. 
 Power and Fear 
 
That great powers fear each other is a central aspect of life in the inter national system. But 
as noted, the level of fear varies from case to case. For example, the Soviet Union worried much less about Germany in 1930 than it did in 1939. How much states fear each othe r matters 
greatly, because the amount of fear between them largely determines the severity of their security competition, as well as the probability that they will fight a war. The more profound the 
fear is, the more intense is the security com petition, and the more likely is war. The logic is 
straightforward: a scared
 state will look especially hard for ways to enhance its security, and it 
will be disposed to pursue risky policies to achieve that end. Therefore, it is important to understand what causes s tates to fear each other more or less intensely. 
Fear among great powers derives from the fact that they invariably have some offensive 
military capability that they can use against each other, and the fact that one can never be 
certain that other states do not intend to use that power against oneself. Moreover, because 
states operate in an anarchic system, there is no night watchman to whom they can turn for help 
if another great power attacks them. Although anarchy and uncertainty about other states' 
intentions create an irreducible level of fear among states that leads to power -maximizing 
behavior, they cannot account for why sometimes that level of fear is greater than at other 
times. The reason is that anarchy and the difficulty of discerning state inte ntions are constant 
facts of life, and constants cannot explain variation. The capability that states have to threaten 
each other, however, varies from case to case, and it is the key factor that drives fear levels up 
and down. Specifically, the more power a state possesses, the more fear it generates among its 
rivals. Germany, for example, was much more powerful at the end of the 1930s than it was at the decade's beginning, which is why the Soviets became increasingly fearful of Germany over 
the course of that decade. 
This discussion of how power affects fear prompts the question, What is power? It is 
important to distinguish between potential and actual power. A state's potential power is based 
on the size of its population and the level of its wealth. These two assets are the main building 
blocks of military power. Wealthy rivals with large populations can usually build formi dable 
military forces. A state's actual power is embedded mainly in its army and the air and naval 
forces that directly support it. Armies are the central ingredient of military power, because they 
are the principal instru ment for conquering and controlling territory —the paramount political 
objective in a world of territorial states. In short, the key component of military might, even in the 
nuclear age, is land power. 
Power considerations affect the intensity of fear among states in three main ways. First, rival 
states that possess nuclear forces that can survive a nuclear attack and retaliate against it are 
likely to fear each other less than if these same states had no nuclear weapons. During the Cold 
War, for example, the level of fear between the superpowers probably would have been substantially greater if nuclear weapons had not been invented. The logic here is simple: 
because nuclear weapons can inflict devastating destruction on a rival state in a short period of 
time, nuclear -armed rivals are going to be reluctant to fight with each other, which means that 
each side will have less reason to fear the other than would otherwise be the case. But as the 
Cold War demonstrates, this does not mean that war between nuclear powers is no longer 
thinkable; they still have reason to fear each other. 
Second, when great powers are separated by large bodies of water, they usually do not 
have much offensive capability against each other, regard less of the relative size of their 
armies. Large bodies of water are formidable obstacles that cause significant power -projection 
problems for attacking armies. For example, the stopping power of water e xplains in good part 
why the United Kingdom and the United States (since becoming a great power in 1898) have 
never been invaded by another great power. It also explains why the United States has never 
tried to conquer territory in Europe or Northeast Asia, and why the United Kingdom has never 
attempted to dominate the European continent. Great powers located on the same landmass 
are in a much better position to attack and conquer each other. That is especially true of states that share a common border. Therefore, great powers separated by water are likely to fear each 
other less than great powers that can get at each other over land. 
Third, the distribution of power among the states in the system also markedly affects the 
levels of fear.
32 The key issue is whether power is dis tributed more or less evenly among the 
great powers or whether there are sharp power asymmetries. The configuration of power that 
generates the most fear is a multipolar system that contains a potential hegemon—what I call 
"unbalanced multipol arity." 
A potential hegemon is more than just the most powerful state in the system. It is a great 
power with so much actual military capability and so much potential power that it stands a good 
chance of dominating and controlling all of the other great powers in its region of the world. A 
potential hegemon need not have the wherewithal to fight all of its rivals at once, but it must have excellent prospects of defeating each opponent alone, and good prospects of defeating some of them in tandem. T he key relationship, however, is the power gap between the potential 
hegemon and the second most powerful state in the system: there must be a marked gap between them. To qualify as a potential hegemon, a state must have— by some reasonably 
large margin —the most formidable army as well as the most latent power among all the states 
located in its region. 
Bipolarity is the power configuration that produces the least amount of fear among the great 
powers, although not a negligible amount by any means. Fear ten ds to be less acute in 
bipolarity, because there is usually a rough balance of power between the two major states in 
the system. Multipolar systems without a potential hegemon, what I call "balanced multipolarity," 
are still likely to have power asymmetries among their members, although these asymmetries 
will not be as pronounced as the gaps created by the presence of an aspiring hegemon. 
Therefore, balanced multipolarity is likely to generate less fear than unbalanced multipolarity, 
but more fear than bipolarity. 
This discussion of how the level of fear between great powers varies with changes in the 
distribution of power, not with assessments about each other's intentions, raises a related point. 
When a state surveys its environment to determine which stat es pose a threat to its survival, it 
focuses mainly on the offensive capabilities of potential rivals, not their intentions. As 
emphasized earlier, intentions are ultimately unknowable, so states worried about their survival 
must make worst -case assumption s about their rivals' intentions. Capabilities, however, not only 
can be meas ured but also determine whether or not a rival state is a serious threat. In short, 
great powers balance against capabilities, not intentions.
33 
Great powers obviously balance ag ainst states with formidable military forces, because that 
offensive military capability is the tangible threat to their survival. But great powers also pay 
careful attention to how much latent power rival states control, because rich and populous 
states usually can and do build powerful armies. Thus, great powers tend to fear states with 
large populations and rapidly expanding economies, even if these states have not yet translated their wealth into military might. 
 
 
The Hierarchy of State Goals 
 Survival is the number one goal of great powers, according to my the ory. In practice, 
however, states pursue non- security goals as well. For example, great powers invariably seek 
greater economic prosperity to enhance the welfare of their citizenry. They sometimes seek to 
promote a particular ideology abroad, as happened during the Cold War when the the United 
States tried to spread democracy around the world and the Soviet Union tried to sell 
communism. National unification is another goal that sometimes motivates states, as it did with 
Prussia and Italy in the nineteenth century and Germany after the Cold War. Great powers also occasionally try to foster human rights around the globe. States might pursue any of these, as well as a number of other non -security goal s. 
Offensive realism certainly recognizes that great powers might pursue these non- security 
goals, but it has little to say about them, save for one important point: states can pursue them as 
long as the requisite behavior does not conflict with balance- of-power logic, which is often the 
case.
34 Indeed, the pursuit of these non -security goals sometimes complements the hunt for 
relative power. For example, Nazi Germany expanded into eastern Europe for both ideological 
and realist reasons, and the superpow ers competed with each other during the Cold War for 
similar reasons. Furthermore, greater economic prosperity invariably means greater wealth, 
which has significant implications for security, because wealth is the foundation of military 
power. Wealthy states can afford powerful mili tary forces, which enhance a state's prospects for 
survival. As the political economist Jacob Viner noted more than fifty years ago, "there is a long-
run harmony" between wealth and power.35 National unification is anoth er goal that usually 
complements the pursuit of power. For example, the unified German state that emerged in 1871 
was more powerful than the Prussian state it replaced. 
Sometimes the pursuit of non- security goals has hardly any effect on the balance of power, 
one way or the other. Human rights interventions usually fit this description, because they tend 
to be small -scale operations that cost little and do not detract from a great power's prospects for 
survival. For better or for worse, states are rarely willing t o expend blood and treasure to protect 
foreign populations from gross abuses, including geno cide. For instance, despite claims that 
American foreign policy is infused with moralism, Somalia (1992- 93) is the only instance during 
the past one hundred years in which U.S. soldiers were killed in action on a humanitarian 
mission. And in that case, the loss of a mere eighteen sol diers in an infamous firefight in 
October 1993 so traumatized American policymakers that they immediately pulled all U.S. 
troops out o f Somalia and then refused to intervene in Rwanda in the spring of 1994, when 
ethnic Hutu went on a genocidal rampage against their Tutsi neighbors.36 Stopping that 
genocide would have been relatively easy and it would have had virtually no effect on the 
position of the United States in the balance of power.37 Yet nothing was done. In short, although 
realism does not pre scribe human rights interventions, it does not necessarily proscribe them. 
But sometimes the pursuit of non- security goals conflicts with balance- of-power logic, in 
which case states usually act according to the dictates of realism. For example, despite the U.S. 
commitment to spreading democra cy across the globe, it helped overthrow democratically 
elected govern ments and embraced a number of authoritarian regimes during the Cold War, 
when American policymakers felt that these actions would help contain the Soviet Union.38 In 
World War II, the liberal democracies put aside their antipathy for communism and formed an 
alliance with the Soviet Union against Nazi Germany. "I can't take communism," Franklin 
Roosevelt emphasized, but to defeat Hitler "I would hold hands with the Devil."39 In the same 
way, Stalin repeatedly demonstrated that when his ideological preferences clashed with power 
consi derations, the latter won out. To take the most blatant example of his realism, the Soviet 
Union formed a non- aggression pact with Nazi Germany in August 1939 —the infamous 
Molotov -Ribbentrop Pact —in hopes that the agreement would at least temporarily satis fy Hitler's 
territorial ambitions in eastern Europe and turn the Wehrmacht toward France and the United 
Kingdom.40 When great powers confront a serious threat, in short, they pay little attention to 
ideology as they search for alliance partners.41 
Security also trumps wealth when those two goals conflict, because "defence," as Adam 
Smith wrote in The Wealth of Nations, "is of much more importance than opulence."42 Smith 
provides a good illustration of how states behave when forced to choose between wealth and 
relative power. In 1651, England put into effect the famous Navigation Act, protectionist 
legislation designed to damage Holland's commerce and ultimately cripple the Dutch economy. 
The legislation mandated that all goods imported into England be carried either in English ships 
or ships owned by the country that originally produced the goods. Since the Dutch produced few 
goods themselves, this measure would badly damage their shipping, the central ingredient in their economic success. Of course, the Navi gation Act would hurt England's economy as well, 
mainly because it would rob England of the benefits of free trade. "The act of navigation," Smith wrote, "is not favorable to foreign commerce, or to the growth of that opulence that can arise 
from it." Neve rtheless, Smith considered the legislation "the wisest of all the commercial 
regulations of England" because it did more damage to the Dutch economy than to the English 
economy, and in the mid- seventeenth century Holland was "the only naval power which could 
endanger the security of England."
43 
 Creating World Order 
 The claim is sometimes made that great powers can transcend realist logic by working 
together to build an international order that fosters peace and justice. World peace, it would 
appear, can only enhance a state's prosperity and security. America's political leaders paid 
considerable lip serv ice to this line of argument over the course of the twentieth century. 
President Clinton, for example, told an audience at the United Nations in Septembe r 1993 that 
"at the birth of this organization 48 years ago ... a generation of gifted leaders from many 
nations stepped forward to organize the world's efforts on behalf of security and prosperity. . . . 
Now history has granted to us a moment of even greater opportunity. . . . Let us resolve that we 
will dream larger. . . . Let us ensure that the world we pass to our chil dren is healthier, safer and 
more abundant than the one we inhabit today."
44 
This rhetoric notwithstanding, great powers do not work together to promote world order for 
its own sake. Instead, each seeks to maximize its own share of world power, which is likely to 
clash with the goal of creat ing and sustaining stable international orders.45 This is not to say that 
great powers never ai m to prevent wars and keep the peace. On the con trary, they work hard to 
deter wars in which they would be the likely vic tim. In such cases, however, state behavior is 
driven largely by narrow calculations about relative power, not by a commitment to bui ld a world 
order independent of a state's own interests. The United States, for exam ple, devoted 
enormous resources to deterring the Soviet Union from start ing a war in Europe during the Cold 
War, not because of some deep- seated commitment to promoting peace around the world, but 
because American leaders feared that a Soviet victory would lead to a dangerous shift in the 
balance of power.46 
The particular international order that obtains at any time is mainly a by -product of the self -
interested behavior o f the system's great powers. The configuration of the system, in other 
words, is the unintended consequence of great -power security competition, not the result of 
states acting together to organize peace. The establishment of the Cold War order in Europe 
illustrates this point. Neither the Soviet Union nor the United States intended to establish it, nor 
did they work together to create it. In fact, each superpower worked hard in the early years of 
the Cold War to gain power at the expense of the other, whi le preventing the other from doing 
likewise.47 The system that emerged in Europe in the aftermath of World War II was the 
unplanned consequence of intense security competition between the superpowers. 
Although that intense superpower rivalry ended along w ith the Cold War in 1990, Russia 
and the United States have not worked together to create the present order in Europe. The 
United States, for example, has rejected out of hand various Russian proposals to make the 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe the central organizing pillar of European 
security (replacing the U.S. -dominated NATO). Furthermore, Russia was deeply opposed to 
NATO expansion, which it viewed as a serious threat to Russian security. Recognizing that 
Russia's weakness would pr eclude any retaliation, however, the United States ignored Russia's 
concerns and pushed NATO to accept the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland as new members. Russia has also opposed U.S. policy in the Balkans over the past decade, especially 
NATO's 1999 war against Yugoslavia. Again, the United States has paid little attention to 
Russia's concerns and has taken the steps it deems necessary to bring peace to that volatile region. Finally, it is worth noting that although Russia is dead set against allowing the United 
States to deploy ballistic missile defenses, it is highly likely that Washington will deploy such a system il it is judged to be technologically feasible. 
For sure, great -power rivalry will sometimes produce a stable interna tional order, as 
happened during the Cold War. Nevertheless, the great powers will continue looking for 
opportunities to increase their share of world power, and if a favorable situation arises, they will 
move to under mine that stable order. Consider how hard the United Sta tes worked dur ing the 
late 1980s to weaken the Soviet Union and bring down the stable order that had emerged in 
Europe during the latter part of the Cold War.
48 Of course, the states that stand to lose power 
will work to deter aggression and preserve the existing order. But their motives will be selfish, 
revolving around balance- of-power logic, not some commitment to world peace. 
Great powers cannot commit themselves to the pursuit of a peaceful world order for two 
reasons. First, states are unlikely to agree on a general formula for bolstering peace. Certainly, international relations scholars have never reached a consensus on what the blueprint should 
look like. In fact, it seems there are about as many theories on the causes of war and peace as 
there are scholars studying the subject. But more important, poli cymakers are unable to agree 
on how to create a stable world. For exam ple, at the Paris Peace Conference after World War I, 
important differences over how to create stability in Europe divided Georges Clemenceau, David Lloyd George, and Woodrow Wilson.
49 In particular, Clemenceau was determined to 
impose harsher terms on Germany over the Rhineland than was either Lloyd George or Wilson, while Lloyd George stood out as the hard- liner on German reparati ons. The Treaty of Versailles, 
not sur prisingly, did little to promote European stability. 
Furthermore, consider American thinking on how to achieve stability in Europe in the early 
days of the Cold War.
50 The key elements for a sta ble and durable system were in place by the 
early 1950s. They included the division of Germany, the positioning of American ground forces 
in Western Europe to deter a Soviet attack, and ensuring that West Germany would not seek to 
develop nuclear weapons. Officials in the Truman administration, however, disagreed about 
whether a divided Germany would be a source of peace or war. For example, George Kennan 
and Paul Nitze, who held important positions in the State Department, believed that a divided 
Germany would be a source of instability, whereas Secretary of State Dean Acheson disagreed 
with them. In the 1950s, President Ei senhower sought to end the American commitment to 
defend Western Europe and to provide West Germany with its own nuclear deterrent. This policy, which was nev er fully adopted, nevertheless caused significant instability in Europe, as it 
led directly to the Berlin crises of 1958 -59 and 1961.
51 
Second, great powers cannot put aside power considerations and work to promote 
international peace because they cannot be sure that their efforts will succeed. If their attempt 
fails, they are likely to pay a steep price for having neglected the balance of power, because if 
an aggressor appears at the door there will be no answer when they dial 911. That is a risk few 
state s are willing to run. Therefore, prudence dictates that they behave according to realist logic. 
This line of reasoning accounts for why collective security schemes, which call for states to put 
aside narrow con cerns about the balance of power and instead act in accordance with the 
broader interests of the international community, invariably die at birth.52 
 
Cooperation Among States 
 
One might conclude from the preceding discussion that my theory does not allow for any 
cooperation among the great powers. But this conclusion would be wrong. States can 
cooperate, although cooperation is sometimes difficult to achieve and always difficult to sustain. 
Two factors inhibit cooperation: considerations about relative gains and concern about 
cheating.53 Ultimately, great powers live in a fundamentally competitive world where they view 
each other as real, or at least potential, enemies, and they therefore look to gain power at each 
other's expense. 
Any two states contemplating cooperation must consider how profits or gains will be 
distributed between them. They can think about the division in terms of either absolute or 
relative gains (recall the distinction made earlier between pursuing either absolute power or 
relative power; the concept here is the same). With absolute gains, each side is concerned with 
maximizing its own profits and cares little about how much the other side gains or loses in the 
deal. Each side cares about the other only to the extent that the other side's behavior affects its 
own prospects for ac hieving maximum profits. With relative gains, on the other hand, each side 
considers not only its own individual gain, but also how well it fares compared to the other side. 
Because great powers care deeply about the balance of power, their thinking focuses on 
relative gains when they consider cooperating with other states. For sure, each state tries to maximize its absolute gains; still, it is more important for a state to make sure that it does no worse, and perhaps better, than the other state in any agr eement. Cooperation is more difficult 
to achieve, however, when states are attuned to relative gains rather than absolute gains.
54 This 
is because states concerned about absolute gains have to make sure that if the pie is 
expanding, they are get ting at least some portion of the increase, whereas states that worry 
about relative gains must pay careful attention to how the pie is divided, which complicates 
cooperative efforts. 
Concerns about cheating also hinder cooperation. Great powers are often reluctant to enter 
into cooperative agreements for fear that the other side will cheat on the agreement and gain a 
significant advantage. This concern is especially acute in the military realm, causing a "special 
peril of defection," because the nature of military w eaponry allows for rapid shifts in the balance 
of power.55 Such a development could create a window of opportunity for the state that cheats 
to inflict a decisive defeat on its victim. 
These barriers to cooperation notwithstanding, great powers do cooper ate in a realist world. 
Balance- of-power logic often causes great powers to form alliances and cooperate against 
common enemies. The United Kingdom, France, and Russia, for example, were allies against Germany before and during World War I. States sometimes cooperate to gang up on a third 
state, as Germany and the Soviet Union did against Poland in 1939.
56 More recently, Serbia and 
Croatia agreed to conquer and divide Bosnia between them, although the United States and its 
European allies prevent ed them fro m executing their agreement.57 Rivals as well as allies 
cooperate. After all, deals can be struck that roughly reflect the distribution of power and satisfy concerns about cheating. The various arms control agreements signed by the superpowers 
during the Cold War, illustrate this point . 
The bottom line, however, is that cooperation takes place in a world that is competitive at its 
core—one where states have powerful incentives to take advantage of other states. This point is 
graphically highlighted by the state of European politics in t he forty years before World War I. 
The great powers cooperated frequently during this period, but that did not stop them from going 
to war on August 1, 1914.
58 The United States and the Soviet Union also cooperated 
considerably during World War II, but that cooperation did not prevent the outbreak of the Cold 
War shortly after Germany and Japan were defeated. Perhaps most amazingly, there was 
significant economic and military cooperation between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union 
during the two years before the Wehrmacht attacked the Red Army.59 No amount of cooperation 
can eliminate the dominating logic of security competition. Genuine peace, or a world in which 
states do not compete for power, is not likely as long as the state system remains anarchic. 
 
Conclusion 
 In sum, my argument is that the structure of the international system, not the particular 
characteristics of individual great powers, causes them to think and act offensively and to seek 
hegemony.
60 I do not adopt Morgenthau's claim that states invariably behave aggressively 
because they have a will to power hardwired into them. Instead, I assume that the principal 
motive behind great -power behavior is survival. In anarchy, however, the desire to survive 
encourages states to behave aggressively. Nor does my theory classify states as more or less 
aggressive on the basis of their eco nomic or political systems. Offensive realism makes only a 
handful of assumptions about great powers, and these assumptions apply equally to all great 
powers. Except for differences in how much power each state con trols, the theory treats all 
states alike. 
I have now laid out the logic explaining why states seek to gain as much power as possible 
over their rivals. I have said little, however, about the object of that purs uit: power itself. The 
next two chapters provide a detailed discussion of this important subject. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Four 
The Primacy of Land Power 
 
Power in international politics is largely a product of the military forces that a state 
possesses. Great powers, however, can acquire different kinds of fighting forces, and how much 
of each kind they buy has important implications for the bal ance of power. This chapter 
analyzes the four types of military power among which states choose—inde pendent sea power, 
strategic airpower, land power, and nuclear weapons —to determine how to weigh them 
against each other and come up with a useful measure of power. 
I make two main points in the discussion below. First, land power is the dominant form of 
military power in the modern world. A state's power is largely embedded in its army and the air and naval forces that support those ground forces. Simply put, the most powerful states 
possess the most formidable armies. Therefore, measuring the balance of land power by itself 
should provide a rough but sound indicator of the relative might of rival great powers. 
Second, large bodies of water profoundly limit the power -projection capabilities of land 
forces. When opposing armies must cross a large expanse of water such as the Atlantic Ocean 
or the English Channel to attack each other, neither army is likely to have much offensive 
capability against its rival, regardless of the size and quality of the opposing armies. The 
stopping power of water is of great significance not just because it is a central aspect of land 
power, but also because it has important conse quences for the concept of hegemony. 
Specifically, the presence of oceans on much of the earth's surface makes it impossible for any 
state to achieve global hegemony. Not even the world's most powerful state can conquer distant 
regions that can be reached only by ship. Thus, great powers can aspire to dominate only the 
region in which they are located, and possibly an adjacent region that can be reached over land. 
For more than a century strategists have debated which form of military power dominates 
the outcome of war. U.S. admiral Alfred Thayer Mahan famously proclaimed the supreme 
importance of independent sea power in The Influence of Sea Power upon History, 1660 -1783 
and his other writings.
1 General Giulio Douhet of Italy later made the case for the primacy of 
strate gic airpower in his 1921 classic, The Command of the Air.2 Their works are still widely 
read at staff colleges around the world. I argue that both are wrong: land power is the decisive 
military instrument. Wars are won by big bat talions, not by armadas in the air or on the sea. The 
strongest power is the state with the strongest army. 
One might argue that nuclear weapons great ly diminish the importance of land power, either 
by rendering great -power war obsolete or by making the nuclear balance the essential 
component of military power in a com petitive world. There is no question that great -power war is 
less likely in a nuclear world, but great powers still compete for security even under the nuclear 
shadow, sometimes intensely, and war between them remains a real possibility. The United States and the Soviet Union, for example, waged an unremitting security competition for fort y-
five years, despite the pres ence of nuclear weapons on both sides. Moreover, save for the 
unlikely sce nario in which one great power achieves nuclear superiority, the nuclear balance 
matters little for determining relative power. Even in a nuclear worl d, armies and the air and 
naval forces that support them are the core ingredient of military power. 
The alliance patterns that formed during the Cold War are evidence that land power is the 
principal component of military might. In a world domi nated by tw o great powers, we would 
expect other key states to join forces with the weaker great power to contain the stronger one. 
Throughout the Cold War, not only was the United States much wealthier than the Soviet Union, 
but it also enjoyed a significant advanta ge in naval forces, strategic bombers, and nuclear 
warheads. Nevertheless, France, West Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and 
eventually China considered the Soviet Union, not the United States, to be the most powerful 
state in the system. Indeed, those states allied with the United States against the Soviet Union 
because they feared the Soviet army, not the American army.
3 Moreover, there is little concern 
about a Russian threat today —even though Russia has thousands of nuclear weapons —
because the Russian army is weak and in no position to launch a major ground offensive. 
Should it recover and become a formidable fighting force again, the United States and its 
European allies would start worrying about a new Russian threat. 
This chapter comprises eight sections. I compare the different kinds of conventional military 
power in the first four sections, aiming to show that land power dominates independent sea power and strategic airpower. In the first section, I describe these different kinds of military 
power more fully and explain why land power is the main instrument for winning wars. In the 
next two sections, I discuss the various missions that navies and air forces perform and then 
consider the evidence on how independent naval and air forces have affected the outcomes of 
great -power wars. The role of land power in modern military history is examined in the fourth 
section. 
The fifth section analyzes how large bodies of water sharply curtail the power -projection 
capabilities of armies and thus shift the balance of land power in important ways. The impact of 
nuclear weapons on military power is discussed in the sixth section. I then describe how to measure land power in the seventh section, which is followed by a short conclusion that 
describes some im plications for international stability that follow from my analysis of power. 
 
Conquest vs. Coercion 
 Land power is centered around armies, but it also includes the air and naval forces that 
support them. For example, navies transport armies across large bodies of water, and 
sometimes they attempt to project ground forces onto hostile beaches. Air forces also transport 
armies, but more important, they aid armies by delivering firepower from the skies. These air 
and naval missions, however, are directly assi sting the army, not acting independently of it. 
Thus, these missions fit under the rubric of land power. 
Armies are of paramount importance in warfare because they are the main military 
instrument for conquering and controlling land, which is the supreme political objective in a 
world of territorial states. Naval and air forces are simply not suited for conquering territory.
4 The 
famous British naval strategist Julian Corbett put the point well regarding the relationship 
between armies and navies: "Since men live upon the land and not upon the sea, great issues 
between nations at war have always been decided—except in the rarest cases —either by what 
your army can do against your enemy's territory and national life, or else by the fear of what the 
fleet makes it possible for your army to do."5 Corbett's logic applies to airpower as well as sea 
power. 
Navies and air forces, however, need not act simply as force multipliers for the army. Each 
can also independently project power against rival states, as many nav alists and airpower 
enthusiasts like to emphasize. Navies, for example, can ignore what is happening on the battlefield and blockade an opponent, while air forces can fly over the battlefield and bomb the 
enemy's homeland. Both blockades and strategic bombing seek to produce victory by coercing 
the adversary into surrendering before its army is defeated on the battlefield. Specifically, the 
aim is to cause the opponent to surrender either by wrecking its economy and thus under mining 
its ability to prosecut e the war, or by inflicting massive punishment on its civilian population. 
The claims of Douhet and Mahan notwithstanding, neither independent naval power nor 
strategic airpower has much utility for winning major wars. Neither of those coercive instrument s 
can win a great -power war operating alone. Only land power has the potential to win a major 
war by itself. The main reason, as discussed below, is that it is difficult to coerce a great power. 
In particular, it is hard to destroy an enemy's economy solel y by blockading or bombing it. 
Furthermore, the leaders as well as the people in modern states are rarely willing to surrender even after absorbing tremendous amounts of punishment. Although blockading navies and 
strategic bombers cannot produce victory by themselves, they sometimes can help armies gain 
victory by damaging the economy that underpins the adversary's military machine. But even in 
this more limited capacity, air and naval forces usually do not play more than an auxiliary role. 
Land power dominates the other kinds of military power for another reason: only armies can 
expeditiously defeat an opponent. Blockading navies and strategic bombing, as discussed 
below, cannot produce quick and decisive victories in wars between great powers. They are 
useful mainly for fighting lengthy wars of attrition. But states rarely go to war unless they think 
that rapid success is likely. In fact, the prospect of a pro tracted conflict is usually an excellent 
deterrent to war.6 Consequently, a great power's army is its main instrument for initiating 
aggression. A state's offensive potential, in other words, is embedded largely in its army. 
Let us now look more closely at the different missions that navies and air forces perform in 
wartime, paying special attention to how blockades and strategic bombing campaigns have 
affected the outcomes of past great -power conflicts. 
 The Limits of Independent Naval Power 
 A navy bent on projecting power against a rival state must first gain command of the sea, 
which is the bedrock mission for naval forces.
7 Command of the sea means controlling the lines 
of communication that crisscross the ocean's surface, so that a state's commercial and military ships can freely move across them. For
 a navy to command an ocean, it need not control all of 
the sea all of the time, but it must be able to control the strategically important parts whenever it wants to use them, and deny the enemy the ability to do likewise.
8 Gaining command of the sea 
can be achieved by destroying rival navies in battle, by blockading them in their ports, or by denying them access to critical sea lanes. 
A navy that commands the oceans may have the freedom to move about those moats, but it 
still must find a way to project power against its rival's homeland; command of the sea by itself 
does not provide that capability. Navies can perform three power -projection missions where 
they are directly supporting the army, not acting independently. 
Amphibious assault takes place when a navy moves an army across a large body of water 
and lands it on territory controlled by a rival great power.
9 The attacking forces meet armed 
resistance either when they arrive at their landing zones or shortly thereafter. Their aim is to engage and defeat the defender's main armies, and to conquer so me portion, if not all, of its 
territory. The Allied invasion of Normandy on June 6, 1944, is an example of an amphibious assault. 
Amphibious landings, in contrast, occur when the seaborne forces meet hardly any 
resistance when - they land in enemy territor y and are able to establish a beachhead and move 
well inland before engaging enemy forces.
10 The insertion of British troops into French -
controlled Portugal during the Napoleonic Wars, discussed below, is an example of an amphibious landing; the landing of German army units in Norway in the spring of 1940 is 
another. 
Troop transport by a navy involves moving ground forces across an ocean and landing them 
on territory controlled by friendly forces, from where they go into combat against the enemy 
army. The navy effectively serves as a ferry service. The American navy performed this mission 
in World War I, when it moved troops from the United States to France, and again in World War 
II, when it moved troops from the United States to the United Kingdom. These different kinds of 
amphibious operations are con sidered below, when I discuss how water limits the striking power 
of armies. Suffice it to say here that invasion from the sea against territory defended by a rival 
great power is usually a daunting task. Troop transport is a much easier mission.
11 
There are also two ways that navies can be used independently to proj ect power against 
another state. In naval bombardment, enemy cities or selected military targets, usually along a 
rival's coast, are hit with sus tained firepower from guns or missiles on ships and submarines, or 
by air craft flying from carriers. The aim is to coerce the adversary either by punishing its cities or 
by shifting the military balance against it. This is not a serious strategy; naval bombardment is 
pinprick warfare, and it has little effect on the target state. 
Although navies often bombarded enemy ports in the age of sail (1500 -1850), they could not 
deliver enough firepower to those targets to be more than a nuisance.12 Moreover, naval gunfire 
did not have the range to hit targets located off the coast. Horatio Nelson, the famous British 
admiral, summed up the futility of naval bombardment with sailing navies when he said, "A 
ship's a fool to fight a fort."13 The industr ialization of navies after 1850 significantly increased the 
amount of firepower navies could deliver, as well as their delivery range. But industrialization 
had an even more profound effect on the ability of land- based forces to find and sink navies, as 
discussed below. Thus, twentieth- century surface navies tended to stay far away from enemy 
coastlines in wartime.14 More impor tant, however, if a great power were to try to coerce an 
adversary with a conventional bombing campaign, it would surely use its ai r force for that 
purpose, not its navy. 
The two great naval theorists of modern times, Corbett and Mahan, believed that a blockade 
is the navy's ace strategy for winning great -power wars. Blockade, which Mahan called "the 
most striking and awful mark of sea power," works by strangling a rival state's economy.15 The 
aim is to cut off an opponent's overseas trade —to deny it imports that move across water and to 
prevent it from exporting its own goods and materials to the outside world. 
Once seaborne trade is severed, there are two ways a blockade might coerce a rival great 
power into surrendering. First, it can inflict severe punishment on the enemy's civilian population, mainly by cutting off food imports and making life miserable, if not deadly, for the 
average citi zen. If enough people are made to suffer and die, popular support for the war will 
evaporate, a result that will either cause the population to revolt or force the government to stop the war for fear of revolt. Second, a blockade can so weaken an enemy's economy that it can 
no longer con tinue the fight. Probably the best way to achieve this end is to cut off a critical 
import, such as oil. Blockading navies usually do not discriminate between these two approaches but instead try to cut off as much of an opponent's overseas trade as possible, 
hoping that one approach succeeds. Regardless, blockades do not produce quick and decisive 
victories, because it takes a long time for a navy to wreck an adversary's economy. 
States usually implement blockades with naval forces that prevent oceangoing commerce 
from reaching the target state. The United Kingdom, for example, has historically relied on its 
surface navy to blockade rivals such as Napoleonic France and Wilhelmine Germany. 
Submarines can also be used to cut an enemy state's overseas trade, as Germany attempted to 
do against the United Kingdom in both world wars, and the United States did against Japan in 
World War II. The Americans also used surface ships, land- based aircraft, and mines to 
blockade Japan. But navies are not always necessary to carry out a blockade. A state that 
dominates a continent and controls its major ports can stop trade between the states located on 
that continent and states located elsewhere, thus blockading the outside states. Napoleon's 
Continental System (1806- 13), which was aimed at the United Kingdom, fits this model. 
 
The History of Blockades 
 
There are eight cases in the modern era in which a great power attempted to coerce another 
great power with a wartime blockade: 1) F rance block aded the United Kingdom during the 
Napoleonic Wars, and 2) the United Kingdom did likewise to France; 3) France blockaded 
Prussia in 1870; 4) Germany blockaded the United Kingdom and 5) the United Kingdom and the 
United States blockaded Germany and Austria- Hungary in World War I; 6) Germany blockaded 
the United Kingdom and 7) the United Kingdom and the United States blockaded Germany and 
Italy in World War II; and 8) the United States blockaded Japan in World War II. The Union's 
block ade of the Confederacy during the American Civil War (1861- 65) is a pos sible ninth case, 
although neither side was technically a great power; I will consider it here nonetheless.
16 
In evaluating these cases, two questions should be kept in mind. First, is there evi dence that 
blockades alone can coerce an enemy into surren dering? And second, can blockades 
contribute importantly to victory by ground armies? Is the influence of blockades on the final 
outcome of wars likely to be decisive, roughly equal to that of land power, or marginal? 
The British economy was certainly hurt by Napoleon's Continental System, but the United 
Kingdom stayed in the war and eventually came out on the winning side.17 The British blockade 
of Napoleonic France did not come close to wrecking t he French economy, which was not 
particu larly vulnerable to blockade.18 No serious scholar argues that the British blockade played 
a key role in Napoleon's downfall. France's blockade of Prussia in 1870 had hardly any effect on 
the Prussian economy, much less on the Prussian army, which won a decisive victory over the 
French army.19 Germany's submarine campaign against British shipping in World War I 
threatened to knock the United Kingdom out of the war in 1917, but that blockade ultimately 
failed and the British army played the key role in defeating Wilhelmine Germany in 1918.20 In 
that same conflict, the British and American navies imposed a blockade of their own on Germany and Austria- Hungary that badly damaged those countries' economies and caused 
great suffering among their civilian populations.
21 Nevertheless, Germ any surrendered only after 
the K aiser's armies, which were not seriously affected by the blockade, were shattered in 
combat on the western front in the summer of 1918. Austria- Hungary, too, h ad to be defeated 
on the battlefield. 
In World War II, Hitler launched another U -boat campaign against the United Kingdom, but 
again it failed to wreck the British economy and knock the United Kingdom out of the war.22 The 
Anglo -American blockade of Nazi G ermany in that same conflict had no significant effect on the 
German economy, which was not particularly vulnerable to blockade.23 Nor did the Allied 
blockade cause Italy's economy much harm, and it certainly had little to do with Italy's decision 
to quit the war in mid- 1943. Regarding the American Civil War, the Confederacy's economy was 
hurt by the Union blockade, but it did not collapse, and General Robert E. Lee surrendered only after the Confederate armies had been soundly defeated in battle. Moreover, Lee's armies were 
not beaten in battle because they suffered from material shortages stemming from the 
blockade.
24 
 The American blockade of Japan during World War II is the only case in which a blockade 
wrecked a rival's economy, causing serious damage to its military forces. Moreover, it is the only 
case among the nine of success ful coercion, since Japan surrendered before its Home Army of 
two mil lion men was defeated in battle.25 There is no question that the blockade played a central 
role in bringin g Japan to its knees, but it was done in tan dem with land power, which played an 
equally important role in produc ing victory. Japan's decision to surrender unconditionally in 
August 1945 merits close scrutiny, because it is a controversial case, and because it has 
significant implications for analyzing the efficacy of strategic airpower as well as blockades.26 
A good way to think about what caused Japan to surrender is to distin guish between what 
transpired before August 1945 and what happened in the fir st two weeks of that critical month. 
By late July 1945, Japan was a defeated nation, and its leaders recognized that fact. The only 
important issue at stake was whether Japan could avoid unconditional surrender, which the 
United States demanded. Defeat was inevitable because the bal ance of land power had shifted 
decisively against Japan over the previous three years. Japan's army, along with its supporting air and naval forces, was on the verge of collapse because of the devastating American 
block ade, and because it had been worn down in protracted fighting on two fronts. The Asian 
mainland was Japan's western front, and its armies had been bogged down there in a costly 
war with China since 1937. Japan's eastern front was its island empire in the western Pacific, 
where the United States was its principal foe. American ground forces, with extensive air and 
naval support for sure, had defeated most of the Japanese forces holding those islands and 
were gearing up to invade Japan itself in the fall of 1945. 
By the end of July 1945, the American air force had been firebombing Japan's major cities 
for almost five months, and it had inflicted massive destruction on Japan's civilian population. 
Nevertheless, this punishment campaign neither caused the Japanese peopl e to put pressure 
on their government to end the war nor caused Japan's leaders to think seriously about throwing in the towel. Instead, Japan was on the ropes because its army had been decimated 
by blockade and years of debilitating ground combat. Still, Japan refused to surrender 
unconditionally. 
Why did Japan continue to hold out? It was not because its leaders thought that their badly 
weakened army could thwart an American invasion of Japan. In fact, it was widely recognized 
that the United States had the military might to conquer the home islands. Japanese 
policymakers refused to accept unconditional surrender because they thought that it was possible to negotiate an end to the war that left Japan's sovereignty intact. The key to success 
was to make th e United States think that it would have to pay a large blood price to conquer 
Japan. The threat of costly victory, they reasoned, would cause the United States to be more flexible on the diplomatic front. Furthermore, Japanese leaders hoped that the Soviet Union, 
which had stayed out of the Pacific war so far, would mediate the peace talks and help produce 
an agreement short of unconditional surrender. 
Two events in early August 1945 finally pushed Japan's leaders over the line and got them 
to accept unconditional surrender. The atomic bombings of Hiroshima (August 6) and Nagasaki 
(August 9) and the specter of more nuclear attacks caused some key individuals, including 
Emperor Hirohito, to push for quitting the war immediately. The final straw was the Soviet 
decision to join the war against Japan on August 8, 1945, and the Soviet attack on the 
Kwantung Army in Manchuria the fol lowing day. Not only did that development eliminate any 
possibility of using the Soviet Union to negotiate a peace agreement, but Japan was now at war 
with both the Soviet Union and the United States. Moreover, the rapid collapse of the Kwantung 
Army at the hands of the Red Army suggested that the Home Army was likely to fall rather 
quickly and easily to the American invasion force. In short, Japan's strategy for gaining a 
conditional surrender was in tatters by August 9, 1945, and this fact was widely recognized by 
the Japanese military, especially the army, which had been the principal roadblock to quitting 
the war. 
The evidence from these cases of blockade suggests two conclusions about their utility for 
winning wars. First, blockades alone cannot coerce an enemy into surrendering. The futility of 
such a strategy is shown by the fact that no belligerent has ever tried it. Moreover, the record 
shows that even blockades used together with land power rarely have produced coercive 
results, revealing the general inability of blockades to coerce. In the nine cases surveyed above, 
the blockading state won five times and lost four times. In fo ur of the five victories, however, 
there was no coercion; the vic tor had to conquer the other state's army. In the single case of 
successful coercion, the U.S. navy's blockade of Japan was only partially responsible for the 
outcome. Land power mattered at least as much as the blockade. 
Second, blockades rarely do much to weaken enemy armies, hence they rarely contribute in 
important ways to the success of a ground cam paign. The best that can be said for blockade is 
that it sometimes helps land power win protracted wars by damaging an adversary's economy. 
Indeed, the blockade of Japan is the only case in which a blockade mat tered as much as land 
power for winning a great -power war. 
 
Why Blockades Fail 
 
Numerous factors account for the limited impact of blockades in great -power wars. They 
sometimes fail because the blockading navy is checked at sea and cannot cut the victim's sea lines of communication. The British and American navies thwarted Germany's blockades in both 
world wars by making it difficult for German submarines to get close enough to Allied shipping to 
launch their torpedoes. Furthermore, blockades sometimes become porous over the course of a 
long war, because of leakage or because neutral states serve as entrepots. The Continental 
System, for example, eroded over time because Napoleon could not completely shut down 
British trade with the European continent. 
Even when a blockade cuts off virtually all of the target state's seaborne commerce, its 
impact is usually limited for two reasons. First, great powers have ways of beating blockades, 
for example by recycling, stockpiling, and substitution. The United Kingdom was heavily dependent on imported food before both world wars, and the German blockades in those 
conflicts aimed to starve the British into submission. The United Kingdom dealt with this threat 
to its survival, however, by sharply increasing its production of foodstuffs.
27 When Germany had 
its rubber supply cut off in World War II, it developed a synthetic substitute.28 Furthermore, great 
powers can conquer and exploit neighboring states, especially since the coming of railroads. 
Nazi Germany, for example, thoroughly exploited the European continent in World War II, 
greatly reducing the impact of the Allied blockade. 
Modern bureaucratic s tates are especially adept at adjusting and ration alizing their 
economies to counter wartime blockades. Mancur Olson demonstrates this point in The 
Economics of the Wartime Shortage, which compares the blockades against the United 
Kingdom in the Napoleoni c Wars, World War I, and World War II.29 He notes that "Britain 
endured the greatest loss of food supplies in World War II, the next greatest loss in World War I, and the smallest loss in the Napoleonic wars." At the same time, the United Kingdom was more 
dependent on food imports during the twentieth century than it was during the Napoleonic 
period. Therefore, one would expect "the amount of suffering for want of food" to be greatest in World War II and least in Napoleon's day. 
But Olson finds the opposite to be true: suffering due to lack of food in the Napoleonic 
period "was probably much greater than in either of the world wars." His explanation for this counterintuitive finding is that the administrative abilities of the British state increased markedly 
over time, so that its capacity to reorganize its economy in wartime and ameliorate the effects of blockade was "least remarkable in the Napoleonic period, more remarkable in World War I, and 
most remarkable in World War II." 
Second, the populations of modern states can absorb great amounts of pain without rising 
up against their governments.
30 There is not a single case in the historical record in which either 
a blockade or a strategic bombing campaign designed to punish an enemy's population caused significant public protests against the target government. If anything, it appears that 
"punishment generates more public anger against the attack er than against the target 
government."
31 Consider Japan in World War II. Not only was its economy devastated by the 
American blockade, but Japan was subjected to a strategic bombing campaign that destroyed 
vast tracts of urban landscape and killed hundreds of thousands of civilians. Yet the Japanese 
people stoically withstood the withering punishment the United St ates dished out, and they put 
little pressure on their government to surrender.32 
Finally, governing elites are rarely moved to quit a war because their populations are being 
brutalized. In fact, one could argue that the more punishment that a population suffers, the more difficult it is for the lead ers to quit the war. The basis of this claim, which seems counterintuitive, 
is that bloody defeat greatly increases the likelihood that after the war is over the people will 
seek revenge against the leaders who led them down the road to destruction. Thus, those 
leaders have a powerful incentive to ignore the pain being inflicted on their population and fight 
to the finish in the hope that they can pull out a victory and save their own skin.
33 
 The Limits of Str ategic Airpower 
 There are important parallels in how states employ their air forces and their navies in war. 
Whereas navies must gain command of the sea before they can project power against rival 
states, air forces must gain com mand of the air, or achieve what is commonly called air 
superiority, before they can bomb enemy forces on the ground or attack an opponent's 
homeland. If an air force does not control the skies, its strike forces are likely to suffer 
substantial losses, making it difficult, if not impossible for them to project power against the 
enemy. 
American bombers, for example, conducted large -scale raids against the German cities of 
Regensburg and Schweinfurt in August and October 1943 without commanding the skies over 
that part of Germany. T he attacking bombers suffered prohibitive losses as a result, forcing the 
United States to halt the attacks until long- range fighter escorts became available in early 
1944.34 During the first days -of the Yom Kippur War in October 1973, the Israeli Air Forc e (IAF) 
attempted to provide much- needed support to the beleaguered Israeli ground forces along the 
Suez Canal and on the Golan Heights. But withering fire from Egyptian and Syrian surface- to-air 
missiles and air -defense guns forced the IAF to curtail that mission.35 
Once an air force controls the skies, it can pursue three power -projection missions in 
support of army units fighting on the ground. In a close air sup port role, an air force flies above 
the battlefield and provides direct tactical support to friendly ground forces operating below. The 
air force's principal goal is to destroy enemy troops from the air, in effect serving as "flying 
artillery." This mission requires close coordination between air and ground forces. Interdiction 
involves air force strikes at the enemy army's rear area, mainly to destroy or delay the 
movement of enemy supplies and troops to the front line. The target list might include supply depots, reserve units, long- range artillery, and the lines of communication that crisscross the 
enemy's rear area and run up to its front lines. Air forces also provide air lift, moving troops and 
supplies either to or within a combat theater. These missions, of course, simply augment an army's power. 
But an air force can also independently proj ect power against an adver sary with strategic 
bombing, in which the air force strikes directly at the enemy's homeland, paying little attention to 
events on the battlefield.
36 This mission lends itself to the claim that air forces alone can win 
wars. Not surprisingly, airpower enthusiasts tend to embrace strategic bombing, which works 
much like its naval equivalent, the blockade.37 The aim of both strategic bombing and 
blockading is to coerce the enemy into surren dering either by massively punishing its c ivilian 
population or by destroy ing its economy, which would ultimately cripple its fighting forces. 
Proponents of economic targeting sometimes favor striking against the enemy's entire industrial 
base and wrecking it in toto. Others advocate strikes limi ted to one or more "critical 
components" such as oil, ball bear ings, machine tools, steel, or transportation networks —the 
Achilles' heel of the enemy's economy.38 Strategic bombing campaigns, like blockades, are not 
expected to produce quick and easy vict ories. 
Over the past decade, some advocates of airpower have argued that strategic bombing can 
secure victory by decapitating the enemy's political leadership.39 Specifically, bombers might be 
used either to kill a rival state's political leaders or to isolate them from their people by attacking 
the leadership's means of communication as well as the security forces that allow it to control 
the population. More benign elements in the adversary's camp, it is hoped, would then stage a 
coup and negotiate peace. Advocates of decapitation also claim t hat it might be feasible to 
isolate a political leader from his military forces, making it impossible for him to command and 
control them. 
Two further points about independent airpower are in order before looking at t he historical 
record. Strategic bombing, which I take to mean non- nuclear attacks on the enemy's homeland, 
has not been an important kind of military power since 1945, and that situation is unlikely to change in the foreseeable future. With the development of nuclear weapons at the end of World 
War II, great powers moved away from threatening each other's homelands with conventionally armed bombers and instead relied on'nuclear weapons to accomplish that mis sion. During the 
Cold War, for example, neither t he United States nor the Soviet Union planned to launch a 
strategic bombing campaign against the other in the event of a superpower war. Both states, 
howev er, had extensive plans for using their nuclear arsenals to strike each other's territory. 
But old- fashioned strategic bombing has not disappeared altogether. The great powers 
continued employing it against minor powers, as the Soviet Union did against Afghanistan in the 
1980s and the United States did against Iraq and Yugoslavia in the 1990s.40 Having the 
capability to bomb small, weak states, however, should not count for much when assessing the 
balance of military might among the great powers. What should count the most are the military 
instruments that the great powers intend to use against each other, and that no longer includes 
strategic bombing. Thus, my analysis of independent airpower is relevant primarily to the period between 1915 and 1945, not to the recent past, the present, or the future. 
The historical record includes fourteen cases of str ategic bombing: five involve great powers 
attacking other great powers, and nine are instances of great powers striking minor powers. The campaigns between rival great powers provide the most important evidence for determining how 
to assess the balance of military might among the great powers. Nevertheless, I also consider 
the cases involving minor powers, because some might think that they —especially the U.S. air 
campaigns against Iraq and Yugoslavia—provide evidence that great powers can use their air 
forces to coerce another great power. That is not so, however, as will become apparent. 
 
The History of Strategic Bombing 
 
The five cases in which a great power attempted to coerce a rival great power with strategic 
bombing are in World War I, when 1) Germany bombed British cities; and in World War II, when 
2) Germany struck again at British cities, 3) the United Kingdom and the United States bombed 
Germany, 4) the United Kingdom and the United States attacked Italy, and 5) the United States 
bombed Japan. 
The nine instances in which a great power attempted to coerce a minor power with strategic 
airpower include 1) Italy against Ethiopia in 1936; 2) Japan versus China from 1937 to 1945; 3) 
the Soviet Union against Finland in World War II; the United States versus 4) North Korea in the 
early 1950s, 5) North Vietnam in the mid- 1960s, and 6) North Vietnam again in 1972; 7) the 
Soviet Union against Afghanistan in the 1980s; and the United States and its allies versus 8) 
Iraq in 1991 and 9) Yugoslavia in 1999. 
These f ourteen cases should be evaluated in terms of the same two questions that informed 
the earlier analysis of blockades: First, is there evidence that strategic bombing alone can 
coerce an enemy into surren dering? Second, can strategic airpower contribute im portantly to 
victory by ground armies? Is the influence of strategic bombing on the final out come of wars 
likely to be decisive, roughly equal to that of land power, or marginal? 
 
Bombing Great Powers 
 
The German air offensives against British cities in W orld Wars I and II not only failed to 
coerce the United Kingdom to surrender, but Germany also lost both wars.
41 Furthermore, there 
is no evidence that either of those bombing campaigns seriously damaged the United 
Kingdom's military capability. Thus, if t here is a case to be made for the decisive influence of 
strategic bombing, it depends largely on the Allied bombing of the so- called Axis powers —
Germany, Italy, and Japan—in World War II. 
A good reason to be skeptical about claims that bombing was of central importance to the 
outcomes of these three conflicts is that, in each case, serious bombing of the target state did 
not begin until well after it was clear that each was going down to de feat. Germany, for example, 
went to war with the United Kingdom in September 1939 and with the United States in 
December 1941. Germany surrendered in May 1945, although it was clear by the end of 1942, if 
not sooner, that Germany was going to lose the war. The Wehrmacht's last major offensive 
against the Red Army was at Kursk in the summer of 1943, and it failed badly. After much 
debate, the Allies finally decided at the Casablanca Conference in January 1943 to launch a 
serious strategic bombing campaign ag ainst Germany. But the air offensive was slow getting 
started, and the bombers did not begin pounding the Third Reich until the spring of 1944, when the Allies finally gained air superiority over Germany. Even historian Richard Overy, who 
believes that air power played a central role in winning the war against Germany, acknowledges 
that it was only "during the last year of the war [that] the bombing campaign came of age."
42 
Italy went to war with the United Kingdom in June 1940 and the United States in Decem ber 
1941. But unlike Germany, Italy quit the war in September 1943, before it had been conquered. 
The Allied bombing campaign against Italy began in earnest in July 1943, roughly two months 
before Italy surrendered. By that point, however, Italy was on the brink of catastrophic defeat. Its 
army was decimated and it no longer was capable of defending the Italian homeland from 
invasion.43 In fact, the Wehrmacht was providing most of Italy's defense when the Allies invaded 
Sicily from the sea in July 1943. 
Japan's war with the United States started in December 1941 and ended in August 1945. 
The serious pounding of Japan from the air began in March 1945, about five months before 
Japan surrendered. At that point, however, Japan had clearly lost the war and was fa cing the 
prospect of surrendering unconditionally. The United States had destroyed Japan's empire in 
the Pacific and effectively eliminated what remained of the Japanese navy at the Battle of Leyte 
Gulf in October 1944. Moreover, the American naval blockade had wrecked the Japanese 
economy by March 1945, an act that had profoundly negative consequences for Japan's army, 
a large por tion of which was bogged down in an unwinnable war with China. 
The fact is that these strategic bombing campaigns were feasible only late in the war when 
the Axis powers were badly battered and headed for defeat. Otherwise, the target states would not have been vulnerable to a sustained aerial assault. The United States, for example, was 
unable to con duct a major bombing campaign against Japan until it had destroyed most of 
Japan's navy and air force and had fought its way close to the home islands. Only then were American bombers near enough to make unhin dered attacks on Japan. Nor could the United 
States effectively employ its strategic bombers against Germany until it had gained air 
superiority over the Third Reich. That difficult task took time and was feasible only because Germany was diverting huge resources to fight the Red Army. 
The best case that can be made for the three Allied strategic bombing campaigns is that 
they helped finish off opponents who were already well on their way to defeat —which hardly 
supports the claim that independent airpower was a decisive weapon in World War II. In 
particular, one might argue that t hose strategic air campaigns helped end the war sooner rather 
than later, and that they also helped the Allies secure better terms than otherwise would have 
been possible. Except for the Italian case, however, the evidence seems to show that strategic 
bombing had little effect on how these conflicts ended. Let us consider these cases in more 
detail. 
The Allies attempted to coerce Germany into surrendering by inflicting pain on its civilian 
population and by destroying its economy. The Allied punishment campaign against German 
cities, which included the infamous "firebombings" of Hamburg and Dresden, destroyed more 
than 40 percent of the urban area in Germany's seventy largest cities and killed roughly 305,000 
civilians.
44 The German people, however, fatalist ically absorbed the punishment, and Hitler felt 
no compunction to surrender.45 There is no doubt that Allied air strikes, along with the 
advancing ground forces, wrecked Germany's industrial base by early 1945.46 But the war was 
almost over at that point, and more important, the destruction of German industry was still not 
enough to coerce Hitler into stopping the war. In the end, the American, British, and Soviet 
armies had to conquer Germany.47 
The strategic bombing campaign against Italy was modest in the extreme compared to the 
pummeling that was inflicted on Germany and Japan.48 Some economic targets were struck, but 
no attempt was made to demolish Italy's industrial base. The Allies also sought to inflict pain on 
Italy's population, but in the period f rom October 1942 until August 1943 they killed about 3,700 
Italians, a tiny number compared to the 305,000 Germans (between March 1942 and April 1945) and 900,000 Japanese (between March and August 1945) killed from the air. Despite its 
limited lethality, the bombing campaign began to rattle Italy's ruling elites in the summer of 1943 
(when it was intensified) and increased the pressure on them to surrender as soon as possible. Nevertheless, the main reason that Italy was desperate to quit the war at that point —and 
eventually did so on September 8, 1943 —was that the Italian army was in tatters and it stood 
hardly any chance of stopping an Allied invasion.
49 Italy was doomed to defeat well before the 
bombing campaign began to have an effect. Thus, the best that can be said for the Allied air offensive against Italy is that it probably forced Italy out of the war a month or two earlier than 
otherwise would have been the case. 
When the American bombing campaign against Japan began in late 1944, the initial goal 
was to use high- explosive bombs to help destroy Japan's economy, which was being wrecked 
by the U.S. navy's blockade.
50 It quickly became apparent, however, that this airpower strategy 
would not seriously damage Japan's industrial base. Therefore, in March 1945, the United 
States decided to try instead to punish Japan's civilian popula tion by firebombing its cities.51 
This d eadly aerial campaign, which lasted until the war ended five months later, destroyed more 
than 40 percent of Japan's 64 largest cities, killed approximately 785,000 civilians, and forced 
about 8.5 million people to evacuate their homes.52 Although Japan sur rendered in August 1945 
before the United States invaded and conquered the Japanese homeland —making this a case 
of succes sful coercion— the firebombing campaign played only a minor role in convincing Japan 
to quit the war. As discussed earlier, blockade and land power were mainly responsible for the 
outcome, although the atomic bombings and the Soviet declaration of war against Japan (both 
in early August) helped push Japan over the edge. 
Thus coercion failed in three of the five cases in which a great pow er was the target state: 
Germany's air offensives against the United Kingdom in World Wars I and II, and the Allied 
bombing campaign against Nazi Germany. Moreover, strategic bombing did not play a key role 
in the Allies' victory over the Wehrmacht. Althou gh Italy and Japan were coerced into 
surrendering in World War II, both successes were largely due to factors other than independent 
airpower. Let us now consider what happened in the past when the great powers unleashed 
their bombers against minor powers. 
 
Why Strategic Bombing Campaigns Fail 
 Strategic bombing is unlikely to work for the same reasons that blockades usually fail to 
coerce an opponent: civilian populations can absorb tremendous pain and deprivation without rising up against their government. Political scientist Robert Pape succinctly summarizes the historical evidence regarding aerial punishment and popular revolt: "Over more than seventy -
five years, the record of air power is replete with efforts to alter the behavior of states by attackin g or threatening to attack large numbers of civilians. The incontrovertible conclusion 
from these cam paigns is that air attack does not cause citizens to turn against their gov ernment. 
... In fact, in the more than thirty major strategic air campaigns that have thus far been waged, 
air power has never driven the masses into the streets to demand anything."
66 Furthermore, 
modern industrial economies are not fragile structures that can be easily destroyed, even by 
massive bombing attacks. To paraphrase Adam Smith, there is a lot of room for ruin in a great 
power's economy. This targeting strategy makes even less sense against minor powers, because they invariably have small industrial bases. 
But what about decapitation? As noted, that strategy failed against Iraq in 1991. It was also 
tried on three other occasions, none of which are included in the previous discussion because 
they were such small -scale attacks. Nevertheless, the strategy failed all three times to produce 
the desired results. On April 14, 1986 , the United States bombed the tent of Muammar Qaddafi. 
The Libyan leader's young daughter was killed, but he escaped harm. It is widely believed that 
the terrorist bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over Scotland two years later was retribution for that 
failed assassination attempt. On April 21, 1996, the Russians targeted and killed Dzhokhar 
Dudayev, the leader of rebel forces in the province of Chechnya 
The aim was to coerce the Chechens into settling their secessionist war with Russia on 
terms that were favorable to the Kremlin. In fact, the rebels vowed to avenge Dudayev's death, 
and a few months later (August 1996) the Russian troops were forced out of Chechnya. Finally, 
the United States launched a brief four -day attack against Iraq in December 1998. "Oper ation 
Desert Fox," as the effort was code- named, was another attempt to decapitate Saddam; it 
failed.67 
Decapitation is a fanciful strategy.68 The case of Dudayev notwithstanding, it especially 
difficult in wartime to locate and kill a rival political leader. But even if decapitation happens, it is unlikely that the successor's politics will be substantially different from those of the dead 
predecessor. This strategy is based on the deep- seated American belief that hostile states are 
essentially comprised of benign citizens controlled by evil lead ers. Remove the evil leader, the 
thinking goes, and the forces of good will triumph and the war will quickly end. This is not a 
promising strategy. Killing a particular leader does not guarantee that one of his cl osest lieu-
tenants will not replace him. For example, had the Allies managed to kill Adolf Hitler, they 
probably would have gotten Martin Bormann or Hermann Goering as his replacement, neither of 
whom would have been much, if any, improvement over Hitler. Furthermore, evil leaders like 
Hitler often enjoy widespread popular support: not only do they some times represent the views 
of their body politic, but nationalism tends to foster close ties between political leaders and their 
populations, especially in w artime, when all concerned face a powerful external threat.
69 
The variant of the strategy that calls for isolating the political leadership from the broader 
population is also illusory. Leaders have multiple channels for communicating with their people, 
and it is virtually impossible for an air force to knock all of them out at once and keep them shut 
down for a long period of time. For example, bombers might be well -suited for damaging an 
adversary's telecommunications, but they are ill -suited for knocking out newspapers. They are 
also ill- suited for destroying the secret police and other instruments of suppression. Finally, 
causing coups that produce friendly leaders in enemy states during wartime is an extremely difficult task. 
Isolating a political lead er from his military forces is equally impractical. The key to success 
in this variant of the strategy is to sever the lines of communication between the battlefield and the political leadership. There are two reasons why this strategy is doomed to fail, h owever. 
Leaders have multiple channels for communicating with their military, as well as with their population, and bombers are not likely to shut them all down simultaneously, much less keep 
them all silent for a long time. Moreover, political leaders wor ried about this problem can 
delegate authority in advance to the appropriate military commanders, in the event that the lines 
of communication are cut. During the Cold War, for example, both superpowers planned for that 
contingency because of their fear of nuclear decapitation. 
It seems clear from the historical record that blockades and strategic bombing occasionally 
affect the outcome of great -power wars but rarely play a decisive role in shaping the final result. 
Armies and the air and naval forces that support them are mainly responsible for determining 
which side wins a great -power war. Land power is the most formidable kind of conventional 
military power available to states.
70 In fact, it is a rare event when a war between great powers 
is not settled l argely by rival armies fighting it out on the battlefield. Although some of the 
relevant history has been discussed in the preceding sections and chapters, a brief overview of 
the great -power wars since 1792 shows that wars are won on the ground. 
 
 
The Dom inating Influence of Armies 
 
There have been ten wars between great powers over the past two cen turies, three of which 
were central wars involving all of the great powers: the French Rev olutionary and Napoleonic 
Wars (1792 -1815), World War I (1914- 18), and World War II (1939- 45); the latter actually 
involved distinct conflicts in Asia and Europe. 
In the wake of the French Revolution, France fought a series of wars over twenty -three 
years against different c oalitions of European great powers, including Austria, Prussia, Russia, 
and the United Kingdom. The out come of almost every campaign was determined by battles 
between rival armies, not battles at sea. Consider, for example, the impact of the famous naval 
Battle of Trafalgar on the course of the war. The British navy deci sively defeated the French 
fleet in that engagement on October 21, 1805, one day after Napoleon had won a major victory 
against Austria in the Battle of Ulm. Britain's victory at sea, however, had little effect on 
Napoleon's fortunes. I ndeed, over the course of the next two years, Napoleon's armies achieved 
their greatest triumphs, defeating the Austrians and the Russians at Austerlitz (1805), the Prussians at Jena and Auerstadt (1806), and the Russians at Friedland (1807).
71 
Furthermore , the United Kingdom blockaded the European continent and Napoleon 
blockaded the United Kingdom. But neither blockade markedly influenced the war's outcome. In 
fact, the United Kingdom was eventually forced to send an army to the continent to fight against 
Napoleon's army in Spain. That British army and, even more important, the Russian army that decimated the French army in the depths of Russia in 1812 were largely responsible for putting 
Napoleon out of business. 
The balance of land power was also the pri ncipal determinant of victory in World War I. In 
particular, the outcome was decided by long and costly battles on the eastern front between German and Russian armies, and on the western front between German and Allied (British, 
French, and American) forces. The Germans scored a stunning victory in the east in October 
1917, when the Russian army collapsed and Russia quit the war. The Germans almost 
duplicated that feat on the western front in the spring of 1918, but the British, French, and 
American armies held fast; shortly thereafter the German army fell apart, and with that the war 
ended on November 11, 1918. Strategic bombing played hardly any role in the final outcome. 
The Anglo -American blockade of Germany surely contributed to the victory, but it was a 
secondary factor. "The Great War," as it was later called, was settled main ly by the millions of 
soldiers on both sides who fought and often died in bloody battles at places like Verdun, 
Tannenberg, Passchendaele, and the Somme. 
The outcome of World War II in Europe was determined largely by bat tles fought between 
rival armies and their supporting air and naval forces. Nazi land power was almost exclusively 
responsible for the tidal wave of early German victories: against Poland in September 1939, 
Franc e and the United Kingdom between May and June 1940, and the Soviet Union between 
June and December 1941. The tide turned against the Third Reich in early 1942, and by May 
1945, Hitler was dead and his successors had surrendered unconditionally. The Germans were 
beaten decisively on the battlefield, mainly on the eastern front by the Red Army, which lost a 
staggering eight million soldiers in the process but managed to cause at least three out of every 
four German wartime casualties.
72 British and American armies also helped wear down the 
Wehrmacht, but they played a consider ably smaller role than the Soviet army, mainly because 
they did not land on French soil until June 1944, less than a year before the war ended. 
The Allies' strategic bombing campaign failed to cripple the German economy until early 
1945, when the war's outcome had already been set tled on the ground. Nevertheless, airpower 
alone did not wreck Germany's industrial base; the Allied armies closing in on the Third Reich 
also played a major r ole in that effort. The British and American navies imposed a blockade on 
the Third Reich, but it, too, had a minor impact on the war's outcome. In short, the only way to 
defeat a formidable continental power like Nazi Germany is to smash its army in bloody land 
battles and conquer it. Blockades and strategic bombing might help the cause somewhat, but 
they are likely to matter primarily on the margins. 
Americans tend to think that the Asian half of World War II began when Pearl Harbor was 
attacked on December 7, 1941. But Japan had been on the warpath in Asia since 1931 and had 
conquered Manchuria, much of northern China, and parts of Indochina before the United States 
entered the war. Immediately after Pearl Harbor, the Japanese military conquered most of Southeast Asia, and virtually all of the islands in the western half of the Pacific Ocean. Japan's 
army was its principal instru ment of conquest, although its navy often transported the army into 
combat. Japan conducted a strategic bombing campaign agains t China, but it was a clear -cut 
failure (as discussed earlier in this chapter). Also, starting in 1938, Japan tried to cut off China's access to the outside world with a blockade, which reduced the flow of arms and goods into China to a trickle by 1942. Nevertheless, China's armies continued to hold their own on the 
battlefield, refusing to surrender to their Japanese foes.
73 In short, land power was the key to 
Japan's military successes in World War II. 
The tide turned against Japan in June 1942, when the American navy scored a stunning 
victory over the Japanese navy at the Battle of Midway. Over the next three years, Japan was 
worn down in a protracted two- front war, finally surrendering unconditionally in August 1945. As 
noted earlier, land power played a critical role in defeating Japan. The U.S. navy's blockade of 
the Japanese homeland, however, was also a deciding factor in that conflict. The firebombing of Japan, including Hiroshima and Nagasaki, certainly caused tremendous suffering in the targeted 
cities, but it played only a minor role in causing Japan's defeat. This is the only great -power war 
in modern history in which land power alone was not principally responsible for determining the 
outcome, and in which one of the coercive instruments —airpower or sea power —played more 
than an auxiliary role. 
Seven other great power vs. great power wars have been fought over the past two hundred 
years: the Crimean War (1853- 56), the War of Italian Unification (1859), the Austro- Prussian 
War (1866), the Franco -Prussian War (1870- 71), the Russo- Japanese War (1904- 5), the 
Russian Civil War (1918- 21), and the Soviet -Japanese War (1939). None of these cases 
involved strategic bombing, and only the Russo -Japanese War had a significant naval 
dimension, although neither side blockaded the other. The rival navies mainly fought for 
command of the sea, which was impor tant because whichever side dominated the water had an 
advantage in moving land forces about the theater of operations.
74 All seven conflicts were 
settled betw een rival armies on the battlefield. 
Finally, the outcome of a major conventional conflict during the Cold War would have been 
determined in large part by events on the central front, where NATO and Warsaw Pact armies 
would have clashed head- on. For sure, the tactical air forces supporting those armies would 
have influ enced developments on the ground. Still, the war would have been decided largely by 
how well the rival armies performed against each other. Neither side would have mounted a 
strategic bombin g campaign against the other, mainly because the advent of nuclear weapons 
rendered that mission moot. Furthermore, there was no serious possibility of the NATO allies 
using independent naval power to their advantage, mainly because the Soviet Union was not 
vulnerable to blockade as Japan was in World War II.75 Soviet submarines probably would have 
tried to cut the sea lines of communication between the United States and Europe, but they 
surely would have failed, just as the Germans had in both world wars. As was the case with 
Napoleonic France, Wilhelmine Germany, and Nazi Germany, a hegemonic war with the Soviet 
Union would have been settled on the ground by clashing armies. 
 The Stopping Power of Water 
 
There is one especially important aspect of land pow er that merits further elaboration: how 
large bodies of water sharply limit an army's power -projection capability. Water is usually not a 
serious obsta cle for a navy that is transporting ground forces across an ocean and landing them 
in a friendly state. But water is a forbidding barrier when a navy attempts to deliver an army onto 
territory controlled and well -defended by a rival great power. Navies are therefore at a 
significant dis advantage when attempting amphibious operations against powerful land- based 
forces, which are likely to throw the seaborne invaders back into the sea. Generally speaking, 
land assaults across a common border are a much easier undertaking. Armies that have to traverse a large body of water to attack a well -armed opponent invari ably have little offensive 
capability. 
 
Why Water Stymies Armies 
 
The basic problem that navies face when conducting seaborne invasions is that there are 
significant limits on the number of troops and the amount of firepower that a navy can bring to bear i n an amphibious operation.
76 Thus, it is difficult for navies to insert onto enemy shores 
assault forces that are powerful enough to overwhelm the defending troops. The specific nature 
of this problem varies from the age of sail to the industrial age.77 
Before the 1850s, when ships were powered by sail, navies were considerably more mobile 
than armies. Not only did armies have to negotiate obstacles such as mountains, forests, 
swamps, and deserts, they also did not have access to good roads, much less railroads or 
motorized vehicles. Land- based armies therefore moved slowly, which meant that they had 
considerable difficulty defending a coastline against a seaborne invasion. Navies that commanded the sea, on the other hand, could move swiftly about the ocean's surface and land 
troops on a rival's coast well before a land- based army could get to the beachhead to challenge 
the landing. Since amphibious landings were relatively easy to pull off in the age of sail, great 
powers hardly ever launched amphibious assaults against each other's territory; instead they 
landed where the opponent had no large forces. In fact, no amphibious assaults were carried 
out in Europe from the founding of the state system in 1648 until steam ships began replacing 
sailing ships in the mid- nineteenth century. 
Despite the relative ease of landing troops in enemy territory, navies were not capable of 
putting large forces ashore and supporting them for long periods. Sailing navies had limited 
carrying capacity, and thus they were rarely capable of providing the logistical support that the 
invading forces needed to survive in hostile territory.
78 Nor could navies quickly bring in 
reinforcements with the necessary supplies. Furthermore, the enemy army, which was fighting 
on its own territo ry, would eventually reach the amphibious force and was likely to defeat it in 
battle. Consequently, great powers in the age of sail launched remarkably few amphibious landings in Europe against either the homeland of rival great powers or territory controlled by 
them. In fact, there were none during the two centuries prior to the start of the Napoleonic Wars 
in 1792, despite the fact that Europe's great powers were constantly at war with each other 
during that long period.
79 The only two amphibious landing s in Europe during the age of sail 
were the Anglo- Russian operation in Holland (1799) and the British invasion of Portugal (1808). 
The seaborne forces were defeated in both cases, as discussed below. 
The industrialization of war in the nineteenth century m ade large- scale amphibious 
invasions more feasible, but they remained an especially for midable task against a well -armed 
opponent.80 From the invader's per spective, the most favorable development was that new, 
steam -driven navies had greater carrying capacity than sailing navies, and they were not 
beholden to the prevailing wind patterns. Consequently, steam -driven navies could land greater 
numbers of troops on enemy beaches and sus tain them there for longer periods of time than 
could their predecessors. "Steam navigation," Lord Palmerston warned in 1845, had "rendered 
that which was before unpassable by a military force [the English Channel] nothing more than a river passable by a steam bridge."
81 
But Palmerston greatly exaggerated the threat of invasion to the United Kingdom, as there 
were other technological developments that worked against the seaborne forces. In particular, 
the development of airplanes, submarines, and naval mines increased the difficulty of reaching 
enemy shores, while the development of airplanes and railroads (and later, paved roads, trucks, 
and tanks) made it especially difficult for amphibious forces to prevail after they put ashore. 
Railroads, which began spreading across Europe and the United States in the mid-
nineteenth century , played an important role in the German wars of unification against Austria 
(1866) and France (1870 -71), and in the American Civil War (1861- 65).82 Amphibious forces 
hardly benefit from railroads as they move across large bodies of water. Also, seaborne f orces 
cannot bring railroads with them, and it is difficult to capture and make use of enemy railroads —
at least in the short term. Railroads, how ever, markedly increase a land- based army's ability to 
defeat an amphibi ous operation, because they allow the defender to rapidly concentrate large 
forces at or near the landing sites. Armies on rails also arrive on the battlefield in excellent 
physical shape, because they avoid the wear and tear that comes with marching on foot. 
Furthermore, railroads are an exc ellent tool for sustaining an army locked in combat with an 
amphibi ous force. For these same reasons, the development in the early 1900s of paved roads 
and motorized as well as mechanized vehicles further advantaged the land -based army against 
the seabor ne invader. 
Although airplanes were first used in combat in the 1910s, it was not until the 1920s and 
1930s that navies began developing aircraft carriers that could be used to support amphibious 
operations.83 Nevertheless, the territorial state under assault benefits far more from airpower 
than do the amphibious forces, because many more aircraft can be based on land than on a 
handful of aircraft carriers.84 A territorial state is essentially a huge aircraft c arrier that can 
accommodate endless numbers of airplanes, whereas an actual carrier can accommodate only 
a small number of air planes. Therefore, other things being equal, the territorial state should be 
able to control the air and use that advantage to pound the amphibious forces on the beaches, or even before they reach the beaches. Of course, the seaborne force can ameliorate this 
problem if it can rely on land- based aircraft of its own. For example, the assault forces at 
Normandy in June 1944 relied heavily on aircraft stationed in England. 
Land- based air forces also have the capability to sink a rival navy. It is actually dangerous to 
place naval forces near the coast of a great power that has a formidable air force. Between 
March and December 1942, for example, Allied convoys sailing between British and Icelandic 
ports and the Soviet port of Murmansk passed close to Norway, where substantial German air 
forces were located. Those land- based aircraft wreaked havoc on the convoys until late 1942, 
when Germ an airpower in the region was substantially reduced.
85 Thus, even if a navy 
commands the sea, it cannot go near a territorial state unless it also commands the air, which is 
difficult to achieve with aircraft carriers alone, because land- based air forces usual ly outnumber 
sea-based air forces by a large margin. 
Submarines were also employed for the first time in World War I, mainly by Germany 
against Allied shipping in the waters around the United Kingdom and in the Atlantic.86 Although 
the German submarine campaign ultimately failed, it demonstrated that a large submarine force could destroy unescorted merchant ships with relative ease. German sub marines also seriously 
threatened the United Kingdom's formidable sur face navy, which spent the war playing a cat-
and-mouse game in the North Sea with the German navy. In fact, the commanders of the British 
fleet lived in constant fear of German submarines, even when they were in home port. But they 
were especially fearful of venturing into the North Sea and bein g drawn near the German coast, 
where submarines might be lying in wait. "The submarine danger," as naval historian Paul 
Halpern notes, "had indeed contributed the most toward making the North Sea for capital ships 
somewhat similiar to the no- man's -land bet ween the oppos ing trench systems on land. They 
would be risked there, but only for spe cific purposes."
87 The submarine threat to surface ships 
has important implications for navies bent on launching amphibious assaults against a rival's 
coast. In particular, an opponent with a formidable submarine force could sink the assaulting 
forces before they reached the beaches or sink much of the striking navy after the assaulting 
forces had landed, thereby stranding the seaborne troops on the beaches. 
Finally, nav al mines, fixed explosives that sit under the water and explode when struck by 
passing ships, increase the difficulty of invading a territorial state from the sea.88 Navies used 
mines effectively for the first time in the American Civil War, but they were first employed on a 
massive scale during World War I. The combatants laid down roughly 240,000 mines between 1914 and 1918, and they shaped the course of the war in impor tant ways.
89 Surface ships 
simply cannot pass unharmed through heavily mined waters; the minefields must be cleared 
first, and this is a difficult, sometimes impossible, task in wartime. A territorial state can therefore 
use mines effectively to defend its coast against invasion. Iraq, for example, mined the waters 
off the Kuwaiti coast be fore the United States and its allies began to amass forces to invade in 
the Persian Gulf War. When the ground war started on February 24, 1991, the U.S. marines did not storm the Kuwaiti beaches but remained on their ships in the gulf.
90 
Although amphibious operations against a land mass controlled by a great power are 
especially difficult to pull off, they are feasible under special circumstances. In particular, they 
are likely to work against a great power that is on the verge of catastrophic defeat, mai nly 
because the victim is not going to possess the wherewithal to defend itself. Furthermore, they 
are likely to succeed against great powers that are defending huge expanses of territory. In 
such cases, the defender's troops are likely to be widely dis persed, leaving their territory 
vulnerable to attack somewhere on the periphery. In fact, uncontested amphibious landings are 
possible if a defend ing great power's forces are stretched thinly enough. It is especially helpful if 
the defender is fighting a tw o-front war, because then some sizable portion of its force will be 
pinned down on a front far away from the seaborne assault.91 In all cases, the invading force 
should have clear -cut air superiority over the landing sites, so that its air force can provide close 
air support and prevent enemy reinforcements from reaching the beachheads.92 
But if none of these circumstances applies and the defending great power can employ a 
substantial portion of its military might against the amphibious forces, the land- based forces are 
almost certain to inflict a devastating defeat on the seaborne invaders. Therefore, when surveying the historical record, we should expect to find cases of amphibious opera tions 
directed against a great power only when the special circumstances described above apply. Assaults from the sea against powerful land forces should be rare indeed. 
 
Continental vs. Insular Great Powers 
 
The historical record illustrates in another way the difficulty of assaulting a great power's 
territory from the sea compared to invading it over land. Specifically, one can distinguish between insular and continental states. An insular state is the only great power on a large body 
of land that is sur rounded on all sides by water. There can be other great powers on the planet, 
but they must be separated from the insular state by major bodies of water. The United 
Kingdom and Japan are obvious examples of insular states, since each occupies a large island 
by itself. The United States is also an insular power, because it is the only great power in the 
Western Hemisphere. A continental state, on the other hand, is a great power located on a large 
body of land t hat is also occupied by one or more other great powers. France, Germany, and 
Russia are obvious examples of conti nental states. 
Insular great powers can be attacked only over water, whereas conti nental powers can be 
attacked over land and over water, provided they are not landlocked.
121 Given the stopping 
power of water, one would expect insular states to be much less vulnerable to invasion than conti nental states, and continental states to have been invaded across land far more often than 
across water. To test this argument, let us briefly consider the history of two insular great 
powers, the United Kingdom and the United States, and two continental great powers, France 
and Russia, focusing on how many times each has been invaded by another state, and whether 
those invasions were by land or sea. 
Until 1945, the United Kingdom had been a great power for more than four centuries, during 
which time it was involved in countless wars. Over that long period, however, it was never 
invaded by another great power, much less a minor power.122 For sure, adversaries sometimes 
threatened to send invasion forces across the English Channel, -yet none ever launched the 
assault boats. Spain, for example, planned to invade England in 1588. But the defeat of the Spanish Armada that same year in waters off England's coast eliminated the naval forces that 
were supposed to have escorted the Spanish army across the English Channel.
123 Although 
both Napoleon and Hitler considered invading the United Kingdom, neither made an attempt .124 
Like the United Kingdom, the United States has not been invaded since it became a great 
power in 1898.125 Britain launched a handful of large -scale raids against American territory 
during the War of 1812, and Mexico raided Texas in the War of 1846- 48. Those conflicts, 
however, took place long before the United States achieved great -power status, and even then, 
neither the United Kingdom nor Mexico seriously threatened to conquer the United States.126 
More important, there has been no serious threat to invade the United States since it became a 
great power at the end of the nineteenth century. In fact, the United States is probably the most 
secure great power in history, mainly because it has always been separated from the world's 
other great powers by t wo giant moats —the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. 
The story looks substantially different when the focus shifts to France and Russia. France 
has been invaded seven times by rival armies since 1792, and it was conquered three of those 
times. During the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars (1792 -1815), rival armies 
attacked France on four separate occasions (1792, 1793, 1813, and 1815), finally inflicting a 
decisive defeat on Napoleon with the last invasion. France was invaded and defeated by 
Prussia in 1870 -71 and was paid another visit by the German army in 1914, although France 
narrowly escaped defeat in World War I. Germany struck once again in 1940, and this time it conquered France. All seven of these invasions came across land; France has never been 
invaded from the sea.
127 
Russia, the other continental state, has been invaded five times over the past two centuries. 
Napoleon drove to Moscow in 1812, and France and the United Kingdom assaulted the 
Crimean Peninsula in 1854. Russia was invaded and decis ively defeated by the German army 
in World War I. Shortly thereafter, in 1921, Poland, which was not a great power, invaded the newly established Soviet Union. The Germans invaded again in the summer of 1941, beginning 
one of the most murderous military ca mpaigns in recorded history. All of these invasions came 
across land, save for the Anglo -French attack in the Crimea.
128 
In sum, neither of our insular great powers (the United Kingdom and the United States) has 
ever been invaded, whereas our continental great powers (France and Russia) have been 
invaded a total of twelve times since 1792. These continental states were assaulted across land 
eleven times, but only once from the sea. The apparent lesson is that large bodies of water 
make it extremely difficult for armies to invade territory defend ed by a well -armed great power. 
The discussion so far has focused on conventional military forces, emphasizing that land 
power is more important than either independent naval power or strategic airpower for winning 
great -power wars. Little has been said, however, about how nuclear weapons affect military 
power. 
 
Nuclear Weapons and the Balance of Power 
 Nuclear weapons are revolutionary in a purely military sense, simply because they can 
cause unprecedented levels of destruction in short periods of time.
129 During much of the Cold 
War, for example, the United States and the Soviet Union had the capability to destroy each other as functioning societies in a matter of days, if not hours. Nevertheless, there is little 
agreement about how nuclear weapons affect great -power politics and, in particular, the 
balance of power. Some argue that nuclear weapons effectively eliminate great -power security 
competition, because nuclear -armed states would not dare attack each other for fear of 
annihilation. The preceding discussion of conventional military power, according to this 
perspective, is largely irrelevant in the nuclear age. But others make the opposite argument: 
because nuclear weapons are horribly destructive, no rational leader would ever use them, even 
in self -defense. Thus, nuclear weapons do not dampen security competition in any significant 
way, and the balance of conventional military power still matters greatly. 
I argue that in the unlikely event that a single great power achieves nuclear superiority, it 
becomes a hegemon, which effectively means that it has no great -power rivals with which to 
compete for security. Conventional forces matter little for the balance of power in such a world. But in the more likely situation in which there are two or more great powers with survivable 
nuclear retaliatory forces, security competition between them will continue and land power will remain the key component of military power. There is no question, however, that the presence 
of nuclear weapons makes states more cautious about using military force of any kind against 
each other. 
 
Nuclear Superiority 
 
In its boldest and most well -known form, nuclear superiority exists when a great power has 
the capability to destroy an adversary's society without fear of major retaliation against its own 
society. In other words, nuclear superiority means that a state can turn a rival great power into 
"a smok ing, radiating ruin" and yet remain largely unscathed itself.
130 That state could also use 
its nuclear arsenal to destroy its adversary's conventional forces, again without fear of nuclear 
retaliation. The best way for a state to achieve nuclear superiority is by arming itself with nuclear 
weapons while making sure no other state has them. A state with a nuclear monopoly, by 
definition, does not have to worry about retaliation in kind if it unleashes its nuclear weapons. 
In a world of two or more nuclear -armed states, one state might gain superiority if it 
develops the capability to neutralize it s rivals' nuclear weapons. To achieve this superiority, a 
state could either acquire a "splendid first strike" capability against its opponents' nuclear 
arsenals or devel op the capability to defend itself from attack by their nuclear 
weapons.131 Nuclear superiority does not obtain, however, simply because one state has 
significantly more nuclear weapons than another state. Such an asymmetry is largely 
meaningless as long as enough of the smaller nuclear arsenal can survive a first strike to inflict 
massiv e punishment on the state with the bigger arsenal. 
Any state that achieves nuclear superiority over its rivals effectively becomes the only great 
power in the system, because the power advantage bestowed on that state would be 
tremendous. The nuclear hegemon could threaten to use its potent arsenal to inflict vast 
destruction on rival states, effectively eliminating them as functioning political entities. The 
potential victims would not be able to retaliate in kind—which is what makes this threat credi ble. 
The nuclear hegemon could also use its deadly weapons for military purposes, like striking large 
concentrations of enemy ground forces, air bases, naval ships, or key targets in the adversary's 
command -and-control system. Again, the target state would not have a com mensurate 
capability, thereby giving the nuclear hegemon a decisive advantage, regardless of the balance 
of conventional forces. 
Every great power would like to achieve nuclear superiority, but it is not likely to happen 
often, and when it does occur, it probably is not going to last for a long time.132 Non-nuclear 
rivals are sure to go to great lengths to acquire nuclear arsenals of their own, and once they do, 
it would be difficult, although not impossible, for a great power to reestab lish superiority by 
insulating itself from nuclear attack.133 The United States, for example, had a monopoly on 
nuclear weapons from 1945 until 1949, but it did not have nuclear superiority in any meaningful 
sense dur ing that brief period.134 Not only was Am erica's nuclear arsenal small dur ing those 
years, but the Pentagon had not yet developed effective means for delivering it to the 
appropriate targets in the Soviet Union. 
After the Soviet Union exploded a nuclear device in 1949, the United States tried, but failed, 
to gain nuclear superiority over its rival. Nor were the Soviets able to gain a decisive nuclear 
advantage over the Americans at any time during the Cold War. Thus, each side was forced to live with the fact that no matter how it employed its ow n nuclear forces, the other side was still 
likely to have a survivable nuclear retaliatory force that could inflict unacceptable damage on an attacker. This "Texas standoff" came to be called "mutual assured destruction" (MAD), because 
both sides probably would have been destroyed if either initiated a nuclear war. However 
desirable it might be for any state to transcend MAD and establish nuclear superiority, it is unlikely to happen in the foreseeable future.
135 
 Military Power in a MAD World 
 A MAD world is highly stable at the nuclear level, because there is no incentive for any great 
power to start a nuclear war that it could not win; indeed, such a war would probably lead to its 
destruction as a functioning society. Still, the question remains: what ef fect does this balance of 
terror have on the prospects for a conventional war between nuclear -armed great powers? One 
school of thought maintains that it is so unlikely that nuclear weapons would be used in a MAD 
world that great powers are free to fight c onventional wars almost as if nuclear weapons did not 
exist. Former secretary of defense Robert McNamara, for example, argues that "nuclear weapons serve no useful military purpose whatsoever. They are totally useless —except only to 
deter one's opponent fr om using them."
136 Nuclear weapons, according to this logic, have little 
effect on state behavior at the conventional level, and thus great powers are free to engage in security competition, much the way they did before nuclear weapons were invented.
137 
The problem with this perspective is that it is based on the assumption that great powers 
can be highly confident that a large- scale conventional war will not turn into a nuclear war. In 
fact, we do not know a great deal about the dynamics of escalation from the conventional to the 
nuclear level, because (thankfully) there is not much history to draw on. Nevertheless, an 
excellent body of scholarship holds that there is some reasonable chance that a conventional 
war among nuclear powers might escalate to the nuclear level.138 Therefore, great powers 
operating in a MAD world are likely to be consider ably more cautious when contemplating a 
conventional war with one another than they would be in the absence of nuclear weapons. 
A second school of thought argues that great powers in a MAD world have little reason to 
worry about the conventional balance because nuclear -armed great powers are simply not 
going to attack each other with conventional forces because of fear of nuclear 
escalation.139 Great powers are remar kably secure in a MAD world, so the argument goes, and 
thus there is no good reason for them to compete for security. Nuclear weapons have made 
great -power war virtually unthinkable and have thus rendered obsolete Carl von Clausewitz's 
dictum that war is an extension of politics by other means. In effect, the balance of terror has 
trivialized the balance of land power. 
The problem with this perspective is that it goes to the other extreme on the escalation 
issue. In particular, it is based on the assumption that it is likely, if not automatic, that a 
conventional war would escalate to the nuclear level. Furthermore, it assumes that all the great 
powers think that conventional and nuclear war are part of a seamless web, and thus there is no 
meaningful distinc tion between the two kinds of conflict. But as the first school of thought 
emphasizes, the indisputable horror associated with nuclear weapons gives policymakers 
powerful incentives to ensure that conventional wars do not escalate to the nuclear level. 
Consequently, it is possible that a nuclear -armed great power might conclude that it could fight 
a conventional war against a nuclear -armed rival without the war turning nuclear, especially if 
the attacking power kept its goals limited and did not threaten to decisively defeat its 
opponent.140 Once this possibility is recognized, great powers have no choice but to compete for 
security at the conventional level, much the way they did before the advent of nuclear weapons. 
It is clear from the Cold War that great powers operating in a MAD world still engage in 
intense security competition, and that they care greatly about conventional forces, especially the 
balance of land power. The United States and the Soviet Union competed with each other for allies and bases all over the globe from the start of their rivalry after World War II until its finish 
some forty -five years later. It was a long and harsh struggle. Apparently, neither nine American 
presidents nor six Soviet leaderships bought the argument that they were so secure in a MAD 
world that they did not have to pay much attention to what happened outside their borders. 
Furthermore, despite their massive nuclear arsenals, both sides invested tremendous resources in their conventional forces, and both sides were deeply concerned about the balance of ground 
and air forces in Europe, as well as in other places around the globe.
141 
There is other evidence that casts doubt on the claim that states with an assured destruction 
capability are remarkably secure and do not have to worry much about fighting conventional 
wars. Most important, Egypt and Syria knew that Israel had nuclear weapons in 1973, but 
nevertheless they launched massive land offensives against Israel.142 Actually, the Syrian 
offensive on the Golan Height s, located on Israel's doorstep, briefly opened the door for the 
Syrian army to drive into the heart of Israel. Fighting also broke out between China and the Soviet Union along the Ussuri River in the spring of 1969 and threatened to escalate into a full -
blown war.
143 Both China and the Soviet Union had nuclear arsenals at the time. China attacked 
American forces in Korea in the fall of 1950, despite the fact that China had no nuclear weapons 
of its own and the United States had a nuclear arsenal, albeit a small one. 
Relations between India and Pakistan over the past decade cast further doubt on the claim 
that nuclear weapons largely eliminate security competi tion between states and make them feel 
as though they have abundant secu rity. Although both India and Pakistan have had nuclear 
weapons since the late 1980s, security competition between them has not disappeared. Indeed, they were embroiled in a serious crisis in 1990, and they fought a major bor der skirmish 
(involving more than a thousand battle deat hs) in 1999.
144 
Finally, consider how Russia and the United States, who still maintain huge nuclear 
arsenals, think about conventional forces today. Russia's deep -seated opposition to NATO 
expansion shows that it fears the idea of NATO's conventional forces moving closer to its border. Russia obviously does not accept the argument that its powerful nuclear retaliatory force 
provides it with absolute security. The United States also seems to think that it has to worry 
about the conventional balance in Europe. After all, NATO expansion was predicated on the 
belief that Russia might someday try to conquer territory in central Europe. Moreover, the United 
States con tinues to insist that Russia observe the limits outlined in the Treaty on Conventional 
Armed Forc es in Europe, signed on November 19, 1990, before the Soviet Union collapsed. 
Thus, the balance of land power remains the central ingredient of mili tary power in the 
nuclear age, although nuclear weapons undoubtedly make great -power war less likely. Now t hat 
the case for land power's pri macy has been detailed, it is time to describe how to measure it. 
 
Measuring Military Power 
 
Assessing the balance of land power involves a three- step process. First, the relative size 
and quality of the opposing armies must be estimated. It is important to consider the strength of 
those forces in peace time as well as after mobilization, bec ause states often maintain small 
standing armies that expand quickly in size when the ready reserves are called to active duty. 
There is no simple way to measure the power of rival armies, mainly because their strength 
depends on a variety of factors, all of which tend to vary across armies: 1) the number of 
soldiers, 2) the quality of the sol diers, 3) the number of weapons, 4) the qu ality of the weaponry, 
and 5) how those soldiers and weapons are organized for war. Any good indicator of land power 
should account for all these inputs. Comparing the number of basic fighting units in opposing 
armies, be they brigades or divisions, is sometimes a sensible way of measuring ground 
balances, although it is essential to take into account significant quantitative and qualitative 
differences between those units. 
During the Cold War, for example, it was difficult to assess the NATO -Warsaw Pact 
conventional balance, because there were substantial differences in the size and composition of the various armies on the cen tral front.
145 To deal with this problem, the U.S. Defense 
Department devised the "armored division equivalent," or ADE, score as a basic meas ure of 
ground force capability. This ADE score was based mainly on an assessment of the quantity 
and quality of weaponry in each army.146 Political scientist Barry Posen subsequently made an 
important refine ment to this measure, which was a us eful indicator of relative army strength in 
Europe.147 
Although a number of studies have attempted to measure force bal ances in particular 
historical cases, no study available has systematically and carefully compared force levels in different armies over long periods of time. Consequently, there is no good database that can be 
tapped to measure military power over the past two centuries. Developing such a database 
would require an enormous effort and lies beyond the scope of this book. Therefore, when I 
assess the power of opposing armies in sub sequent chapters, I cobble together the available 
data on the size and quality of the relevant armies and come up with rather rough indicators of military might. I start by counting the number of soldiers in each a rmy, which is reasonably easy 
to do, and then attempt to account for the other four factors that affect army strength, which is a more difficult task. 
The second step in assessing the balance of land power is to factor any air forces that 
support armies into the analysis.
148 We must assess the inventory of aircraft on each side, 
focusing on available numbers and quality. Pilot efficiency must also be taken into account as 
well as the strength of each side's 1) ground -based air defense systems, 2) reconnais sance 
capabilities, and 3) battle -management systems. 
Third, we must consider the power -projection capability inherent in armies, paying special 
attention to whether large bodies of water limit an army's offensive capability. If there is such a 
body of wat er, and if an ally lies across it, one must assess the ability of navies to protect the 
movement of troops and supplies to and from that ally. But if a great power can cross the water 
only by directly assaulting territory on the other side of the water that is well- defended by a rival 
great power, the assessment of naval power is probably unnecessary, because such 
amphibious assaults are rarely possible. Thus the naval forces that might support that army are 
rarely useful, and hence judgments about their ca pabilities are rarely relevant to strategy. In 
those special circumstances where amphibious opera tions are feasible against a rival great 
power's territory, however, it is essential to assess the ability of the relevant navy to project seaborne forces as hore. 
 Conclusion 
 
Armies, along with their supporting air and naval forces, are the para mount form of military 
power in the modern world. Large bodies of water, however, severely limit the power -projection 
capabilities of armies, and nuclear weapons mark edly reduce the likelihood that great -power 
armies will clash. Nevertheless, even in a nuclear world, land power remains king. 
This conclusion has two implications for stability among the great pow ers. The most 
dangerous states in the international system are continental powers with large armies. In fact, 
such states have initiated most of the past wars of conquest between great powers, and they have almost always attacked other continental powers, not insular powers, which are protect ed 
by the water surr ounding them. This pattern is clearly reflected in European history over the 
past two centuries. During the years of almost constant warfare between 1792 and 1815, 
France was the main aggressor as it conquered or tried to conquer other continental powers 
such as Austria, Prussia, and Russia. Prussia attacked Austria in 1866, and although France 
declared war on Prussia in 1870, that decision was provoked by Prussia, which invaded and 
conquered France. Germany began World War I with the Schlieffen Plan, which aimed to knock 
France out of the war so that the Germans could then turn eastward and defeat Russia. 
Germany began World War II with separate land offensives against Poland (1939), France 
(1940), and the Soviet Union (1941). None of these aggressors attem pted to invade either the 
'United Kingdom or the United States. During the Cold War, the principal scenario that concerned NATO planners was a Soviet invasion of Western Europe. 
In contrast, insular powers are unlikely to initiate wars of conquest against other great 
powers, because they would have to traverse a large body of water to reach their target. The same moats that protect insular powers also impede their ability to project power. Neither the 
United Kingdom nor the United States, for example, has ever seriously threatened to conquer 
another great power. British policymakers did not contemplate starting a war against either 
Wilhelmine or Nazi Germany, and during the Cold War, American policymakers never seriously 
counte nanced a war of conquest agai nst the Soviet Union. Although the United Kingdom (and 
France) declared war against Russia in March 1854 and then invaded the Crimean Peninsula, 
the United Kingdom had no inten tion of conquering Russia. Instead, it entered an ongoing war 
between Turkey and Russia for the purpose of checking Russian expansion in the region around the Black Sea. 
The Japanese attack against the United States 'at Pearl Harbor in December 1941 might 
appear to be another exception to this rule, since Japan is an insular state, and it struck first against another great power. However, Japan did not invade any part of the United States, and 
Japanese leaders certainly gave no thought to conquering it. Japan merely sought to establish 
an empire in the western Pacific by capturing the various islands located between it and Hawaii. 
Japan also initiated wars against Russia in 1904 and 1939, but in neither case did Japan invade 
Russia or even think about conquering it. Instead, those fights were essen tially for control of 
Korea, Manchur ia, and Outer Mongolia. 
Finally, given that oceans limit the ability of armies to project power, and that nuclear 
weapons decrease the likelihood of great -power army clashes, the most peaceful world would 
probably be one where all the great powers were ins ular states with survivable nuclear 
arsenals.
149 
This concludes the discussion of power. Understanding what power is, however, should 
provide important insights into how states behave, espe cially how they go about maximizing 
their share of world power, which is the subject of the next chapter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Six 
Great Powers in Action 
 
My theory offered in Chapter 2 attempts to explain why great powers tend to have 
aggressive intentions and why they aim to maximize their share of world power. I tried there to 
provide a sound logical foundation for my claims that status quo powers are rarely seen in the 
international system, and that especially powerful states usually pursue regional hegemony. 
Whether my theory is ultimate ly persuasive, however, depends on how well it explains the 
actual behav ior of the great powers. Is there substantial evidence that great powers think and 
act as offensive realism predicts? 
To answer yes to this question and show that offensive realism provides the best account of 
great -power behavior, I must demonstrate that 1) the history of great -power politics involves 
primarily the clashing of revision ist states, and 2) the only status quo powers that appear in the 
story are regional hegemons —i.e., states that have achieved the pinnacle of power. In other 
words, the evidence must show that great powers look for oppor tunities to gain power and take 
advantage of them when they arise. It must also show that great powers do not practice self -
denial when they have the wherewithal to shift the balance of power in their favor, and that the 
appetite for power does not decline once states have a lot of it. Instead, powerful states should 
seek regional hegemony whenever the possibility arises. Finally, there should be little evidence 
of policymakers saying that they are satisfied with their share of world power when they have 
the capability to gain more. Indeed, we should almost always find leaders thinking that it is 
imperative to gain more power to enhance their state's prospects for survival. 
Demonstrating that the international system is populated by revisionist powers is not a 
simple matter, because the universe of potential cases is vast.1 After all, great powers have 
been competing among themselves for centuries, and there is lot s of state behavior that is fair 
game for testing my argument. To make the inquiry manageable, this study takes four dif ferent 
perspectives on the historical record. Although I am naturally anx ious to find evidence that 
supports offensive realism, I make a serious effort to argue against myself by looking for 
evidence that might refute the theory. Specifically, I try to pay equal attention to instances of 
expan sion and of non -expansion and to show that the cases of non- expansion were largely the 
result o f successful deterrence. I also attempt to employ consistent standards when measuring 
the constraints on expansion in the cases examined. 
First, I examine the foreign policy behavior of the five dominant great powers of the past 150 
years: Japan from the t ime of the Meiji Restoration in 1868 until the country's defeat in World 
War II; Germany from the com ing to power of Otto von Bismarck in 1862 until Adolf Hitler's final 
defeat in 1945; the Soviet Union from its inception in 1917 until its collapse in 1991; Great Britain/the United Kingdom from 1792 until 1945; and the United States from 1800 to 1990.
21 
choose to examine wide swaths of each state's history rather than more discrete time periods 
because doing so helps show that particular acts of aggression were not instances of aberrant 
behavior caused by domestic politics, but, as offensive realism would predict, part of a broader 
pattern of aggressive behavior. 
Japan, Germany, and the Soviet Union are straightforward cases that provide strong 
support for my theory. They were almost always looking for opportunities to expand through 
conquest, and when they saw an opening, they usually jumped at it. Gaining power did not temper their offensive proclivities; it whetted them. In fact, all three great powers sought regional 
hegemony. Germany and Japan fought major wars in pursuit of that goal; only the United States 
and its allies deterred the Soviet Union from trying to conquer Europe. Furthermore, there is 
considerable evidence that policymakers in these states talked and thought like offensive 
realists. It is certainly hard to find evidence of key leaders expressing satisfaction with the existing balance of power, especially when their state had the capability to alter it. In sum, 
security considerations appear to have been the main driving force behind the aggressive 
policies of Germany, Japan, and the Soviet Union. 
The United Kingdom and the United States, however, might appear to have behaved in 
ways that contradict offensive realism. For example, the Unit ed Kingdom was by far the 
wealthiest state in Europe during much of the nineteenth century, but it made no attempt to translate its consider able wealth into military might and gain regional hegemony. Thus, it seems 
that the United Kingdom was not interest ed in gaining relative power, despite the fact that it had 
the wherewithal to do so. During the first half of the twentieth century, it looks like the United States passed up a number of opportunities to project power into Northeast Asia and Europe, 
yet in stead it pursued an isolationist foreign policy —hardly evi dence of aggressive behavior. 
Nonetheless, I will argue that the United Kingdom and the United States did behave in 
accordance with offensive realism. The United States aggressively pursued hegemony in the Western Hemisphere during the nineteenth century, mainly to maximize its prospects of 
surviving in a hostile world. It succeeded, and it stands as the only great power in mod ern 
history to have achieved regional hegemony. The United States did no t attempt to conquer 
territory in either Europe or Northeast Asia dur ing the twentieth century, because of the great 
difficulty of projecting power across the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Nevertheless, it acted as 
an offshore balancer in those strategical ly important areas. The stopping power of water also 
explains why the United Kingdom never attempted to dominate Europe in the nineteenth 
century. Because they require detailed discussion, the American and British cases are dealt 
with in the next chapter. 
Second, I examine the foreign policy behavior of Italy from its creation as a unified state in 
1861 until its defeat in World War II. Some might concede that the mightiest great powers look for opportunities to gain power, yet still think that the other g reat powers, especially the weaker 
ones, behave like status quo powers. Italy is a good test case for this line of argument, because 
it was clearly "the least of the great powers" for virtu ally the entire time it ranked as a player in 
European politics.
3 Despite Italy's lack of military might, its leaders were constantly probing for 
opportunities to gain power, and when one presented itself, they rarely hesitated to seize it. Furthermore, Italian policymakers were motivated to be aggressive in large part by balance- of-
power considerations. 
Third, one might concede that "the number of cases in which a strong dynamic state has 
stopped expanding because of satiation or has set mod est limits to its power aims has been few 
indeed" but nevertheless main tain tha t those great powers were foolish to behave aggressively, 
because offense usually led to catastrophe.
4 Those states ultimately would have been more 
secure if they had concentrated on maintaining the balance of power, not attempting to alter it by force. This self -defeating behavior, so the argument goes, cannot be explained by strategic 
logic but must instead be the result of misguided policies pushed by selfish interest groups on the home front. Defensive realists often adopt this line of argument. Their f avorite examples of 
self-defeating behavior are Japan before World War II, Germany before World War I, and 
Germany before World War II: each state suffered a crushing military defeat in the ensuing war. I challenge this general line of argument, paying car eful attention to the German and Japanese 
cases, where the evidence shows that they were not engaged in self -defeating behavior fueled 
by malign domestic politics. 
Finally, I examine the nuclear arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union 
during the Cold War. Defensive realists suggest that once nuclear -armed rivals develop the 
capability to destroy each other as functioning societies, they should be content with the world 
they have created and not attempt to change it. In other words, they should become status quo 
powers at the nuclear level. According to offensive realism, however, those rival nuclear powers 
will not simply accept mutual assured destruction (MAD) but instead will strive to gain nuclear 
superiority over the other side. I will attempt to show that the nuclear weapons policies of both 
superpowers were largely consistent with the predictions of offensive realism. 
With the exception of the American and British cases, which are dis cussed in the next 
chapter, my four different cuts at the historical record are dealt with here in the order in which 
they were described above. Therefore, let us begin with an assessment of Japanese foreign 
policy between the Meiji Restoration and Hiroshima. 
 
The Soviet Union (1917 -91) 
 
Russia had a rich history of expansionist behavior before the Bolsheviks came to power in 
October 1917. Indeed, "the Russian Empire as it appeared in 1917 was the product of nearly four centuries of continuous expansion."
53 There is considerable evidence that Vladimir Lenin, 
Josef Stalin, and their successors wanted to follow in the tsars' foot steps and further expand 
Soviet borders. But opportunities for expansion were limited in the Soviet Union's seventy -five-
year history. Between 1917 and 1933, the country was essential ly too weak to take the 
offensive against rival major powers. After 1933, it had its hands full just trying to contain 
dangerous threats on its flanks: imperial Japan in Northeast Asia and Nazi Germany in Europe. 
During the Cold War, the United States and its allies were determined to check Soviet 
expansion all across the globe. Nevertheless, the Soviets had some chances to expand, and 
they almost always took advantage of them. 
There was a deep -seated and long -standing fear among Russia's rulers that their country 
was vulnerable to invasion, and that the best way to deal with that problem was to expand 
Russia's borders. Not surprisingly, Russian thinking about foreign policy before and after the 
Bolshevik Revolution was motivated largely by realist logic. Describing the "dis course of 
Russia's statesmen" between 1600 and 1914, William Fuller writes, "They generally employed 
the cold- blooded language of strategy and analysis. They weighed the international impact of 
what, they pro posed to do; they pondered the strengths and weaknesses of their prospective 
enemies; and they justified their policies in terms of the bene fits they anticipated for Russian 
power and security. One is struck by the omnipresence of this style of reasoning."54 
When the Bolsheviks came to power in 1917, they apparently believed that international 
politics would immediately undergo a fundamental transformation and that balance- of-power 
logic would be relegated to the boneyard of history. Specifically, they thought that with some 
help from the Soviet Union, communist revolutions would spread across Europe and the rest of 
the world, creating like- minded states that would live in peace before finally withering away 
altogether. Thus, Leon Trotsky's famous quip in November 1917, when he was appointed 
commissar for foreign affairs: "I shall issue some revolutionary proclamations to the peoples and 
then close up shop." Similarly, Lenin said in October 1917, "What, are we going to have foreign 
affairs?"55 
World revolution never happened, however, and Lenin quickly became "a political realist 
second to none."56 In fact, Richard Debo argues that Lenin abandoned the idea of spreading 
communism so fast that he doubts Lenin ever took the idea seriously.57 Stalin, who ran Soviet 
foreign policy for almost thirty years after Lenin died, was also driven in large part by the cold 
logic of realism, as exemplified by his willingness to cooperate with Nazi Germany between 
1939 and 1941.58 Ideology mattered little for Stalin's successors, not simply because they t oo 
were deeply affected by the imperatives of life in an anarchic system, but also because "Stalin 
had undercut deep faith in Marxist -Leninist ideological universalism and killed its genuine 
advocates; he had reduced the party ideologues to pro pagandist pawns in his global 
schemes."59 
In short, Soviet foreign policy behavior over time was driven mainly by calculations about 
relative power, not by communist ideology. "In the international sphere," as Barrington Moore notes, "the Communist rulers of Russia have depended to a great extent on techniques that 
owe more to Bismarck, Machiavelli, and even Aristotle than they do to Karl Marx or Lenin. This 
pattern of world politics has been widely recognized as a sys tem of inherently unstable 
equilibrium, described in the concept of the balance of power."60 
This is not to say that communist ideology did not matter at all in the conduct of Soviet 
foreign policy.61 Soviet leaders paid some attention to promoting world revolution in the 1920s, 
and they also paid attent ion to ideology in their dealings with the Third World during the Cold 
War. Moreover, there was often no conflict between the dictates of Marxist ideology and 
realism. The Soviet Union, for example, clashed with the United States from 1945 until 1990 for 
ideological as well as balance- of-power reasons. Also, virtually every time the Soviet Union 
behaved aggressively for security -related reasons, the action could be justified as promoting the 
spread of communism. But whenever there was a conflict between the two approaches, realism 
invariably won out. States do whatever is necessary to survive and the Soviet Union was no exception in this regard. 
 Targets and Rivals 
 The Soviet Union was concerned mainly with controlling territory and dominating other 
states in Europe and Northeast Asia, the two regions in which it is located. Until 1945, its 
principal rivals in those areas were local great powers. After 1945, its main adversary in both Europe and Northeast Asia was the United States, with which it competed all across the globe. 
Germany was the Soviet Union's main European rival between 1917 and 1945, although 
they were allies from 1922 to 1933 and from 1939 to 1941. The United Kingdom and France 
had frosty and sometimes hostile relations with Moscow from the time of the Bolshevik 
Revolution until the early years of World War II, when the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union 
finally came together to fight the Nazis. During the Cold War, the Soviet Union and its Eastern 
European allies were arrayed against the United States and its Western European allies; 
indeed, the Soviet Union's chief foreign policy goal over the course of its history was to control 
Eastern Europe. Soviet leaders surely would have liked to dominate Western Europe as well 
and become Europe's fi rst hegemon, but that was not fea sible, even after the Red Army 
destroyed the Wehrmacht in World War II, because the North Atlantic Treaty Organization stood 
squarely in its way. 
In Northeast Asia, Japan was the Soviet Union's archenemy from 1917 until 1945. Like 
tsarist Russia, the Soviet Union sought to control Korea, Manchuria, the Kurile Islands, and the 
southern half of Sakhalin Island, all of which were dominated by Japan during this period. When 
World War II ended in 1945, the United States became M oscow's main enemy in Northeast 
Asia; China became an important Soviet ally after Mao Zedong's victory over the Nationalists in 1949. However, China and the Soviet Union had a serious falling out in the late 1950s, which 
led China to ally with the United S tates and Japan against the Soviet Union in the early 1970s. 
The Soviet Union gained control of the Kuriles and all of Sakhalin Island in 1945, and Manchuria 
came under the firm control of China after 1949, leaving Korea as the region's main 
battleground during the Cold War. 
Soviet leaders were also interested in expanding into the Persian Gulf region, especially into 
oil-rich Iran, which shared a border with the Soviet Union. Finally, during the Cold War, Soviet 
policymakers were deter mined to win allies and gain influence in virtually every area of the Third 
World, including Africa, Latin America, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, and the South Asian 
subcontinent. Moscow was not bent on conquering and controlling territory in those less -
developed regions, however. Instead, it sought client states that would be useful in its global 
competi tion with the United States. 
 
 
 
 
The Soviet Union's Record of Expansion 
 
The Soviet Union was engaged in a desperate fight for survival during the first three years of 
its existence (1917- 20) ,62 Immediately after the Bolshevik Revolution, Lenin pulled the Soviet 
Union out of World War I, but in the process he was forced to make huge territorial concessions 
to Germany in the Treaty of Brest -Litovsk (March 15, 1918).63 Short ly thereafter, the Western 
allies, who were still fighting against Germany on the western front, inserted ground forces into 
the Soviet Union.64 Their aim was to force the Soviet Union to rejoin the war against Germany. 
That did not happen, however, in lar ge part because the Germ an army was defeated on the 
battlefield in the late summer and early fall of 1918, and World War I ended on November 11, 
1918. 
Germany's defeat was good news for the Soviet leaders, because it spelled the death of the 
Brest -Litovsk treaty, which had robbed the Soviet Union of so much of its territory. Moscow's 
troubles were far from over, however. A bloody civil war between the Bolsheviks and various 
rival groups had broken out in the first months of 1918. To make matters worse, the Western 
allies supported the anti -Bolshevik forces, also known as the "Whites," in their fight with the 
Bolshevik "Reds" and kept their intervention forces in the Soviet Union until the summer of 
1920. Although the Bolsheviks sometimes appeared to be on t he verge of losing the civil war, 
the balance of power shifted decisively against the Whites in early 1920, and it was then only a 
matter of time before they were defeated. But before that could happen, the newly created state 
of Poland took advan tage of Soviet weakness and invaded the Ukraine in April 1920. Poland 
hoped to break apart the Soviet Union and make Belorussia and Ukraine independent states. The hope was that those new states would then join a Polish- dominated federation of 
independent eastern European states. 
The Polish army scored major victories in the early fighting, capturing Kiev in May 1920. But 
later that summer the Red Army turned the tide of battle, so much so that by the end of July, 
Soviet forces reached the Soviet -Polish border. Amazingly, the Soviets now had an opportunity 
to invade and conquer Poland, and maybe with help from Germany (the other great power 
unhappy about Poland's existence), redraw the map of eastern Europe. Lenin quickly seized the opportunity and sent the Red Army toward Warsaw.
65 But the Polish army, with help from 
France, rout ed the invading Soviet forces and pushed them out - of Poland. Both sides were 
exhausted from the fighting by then, so they signed an armistice in October 1920 and a formal 
peace treaty in M arch 1921. By that point the civil war was effectively over and the Western 
allies had withdrawn their troops from Soviet territory.66 
Soviet leaders were in no position to pursue an expansionist foreign policy during the 1920s 
or early 1930s, mainly because they had to con centrate on consolidating their rule at home and 
rebuilding their econo my, which had been devastated by all the years of war.67 For example, the 
Soviet Union controlled a mere 2 percent of European industrial might by 1920 (see Table 3. 3). 
But Moscow did pay some attention to foreign affairs. In particular, it maintained close relations 
with Germany from April 1922, when the Treaty of Rapallo was signed, until Hitler came to 
power in early 1933.6S Although both states were deeply interes ted in altering the territorial 
status quo, neither possessed a serious offensive military capability. Soviet leaders also made an effort in the 1920s to spread communism around the globe. But they were always careful not 
to provoke the other great powers into moving against the Soviet Union and threatening its 
survival. Virtually all of these efforts to foment revolution, whether in Asia or Europe, came up 
short. 
Probably the most important Soviet initiative of the 1920s was Stalin's decision to modernize 
the Soviet economy through forced industrializa tion and the ruthless collectivization of 
agriculture. He was motivated in large part by security concerns. In particular, he believed that if the Soviet economy continued to lag behind those of the world's other industrialized states, the Soviet Union would be destroyed in a future great -power war. Speaking in 1931, Stalin said, 
"We have lagged behind the advanced countries by fifty to a hundred years. We must cover that 
distance in ten years. Either we'll do it or they will crush us."69 A series of five- year plans, 
initiated in October 1928, transformed the Soviet Union from a destitute great power in the 1920s into Europe's most powerful state by the end of World War II. 
The 1930s was a decade of great peril for the Soviet Union; it faced deadly threats from 
Nazi Germany in Europe and imperial Japan in Northeast Asia. Although the Red Army ended up in a life -and-death struggle with the Wehrmacht during World War II, not with the Japanese 
army, Japan was probably the more dangerous threat to the Soviet Union throughout the 1930s.
70 Indeed, Soviet and Japanese troops engaged in a series of border clashes in the late 
1930s, culminating in a brief war at Nomonhan in the summer of 1939. Moscow was in no 
position to take the offensive in Asia during the 1930s, but instead concentrated on containing 
Japanese expansion. Toward that end, the Soviets maintained a powerful military presence in 
the region and provided considerable assistance to China after the start of the Sino-Japanese 
War in the summer of 1937. Their aim was to keep Japan bogged down in a war of attrition with China. 
The Soviet Union's main strategy for dealing with Nazi Germany con tained an important 
offensive dimension.
71 Stalin apparently understood s oon after Hitler came to power that the 
Third Reich was likely to start a great -power war in Europe and that there was not much chance 
of recon stituting the Triple Entente (the United Kingdom, France, Russia) to deter Nazi 
Germany or fight against it if w ar broke out. So Stalin pursued a buck -passing strategy. 
Specifically, he went to considerable lengths to develop friendly relations with Hitler, so that the 
Nazi leader would strike first against the United Kingdom and France, not the Soviet Union. 
Stalin hoped that the ensuing war would be long and costly for both sides, like World War I on 
the western front, and thus would allow the Soviet Union to gain power and territory at the 
expense of the United Kingdom, France, and especially Germany. 
Stalin final ly succeeded in passing the buck to the United Kingdom and France in the 
summer of 1939 with the signing of the Molotov -Ribbentrop Pact, in which Hitler and Stalin 
agreed to gang up on Poland and divide it between them, and Hitler agreed to allow the Soviet 
Union a free hand in the Baltic states (Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania) and Finland. This 
agreement meant that the Wehrmacht would fight against the United Kingdom and France, not 
the Soviet Union. The Soviets moved quickly to implement the pact. After c onquering the 
eastern half of Poland in September 1939, Stalin forced the Baltic countries in October to allow 
Soviet forces to be stationed on their territory. Less than a year later, in June 1940, the Soviet 
Union annexed those three tiny states. Stalin demanded territorial concessions from Finland in 
the fall of 1939, but the Finns refused to make a deal. So Stalin sent the Red Army into Finland 
in November 1939 and took the territory he wanted by force.72 He was also able to convince 
Hitler in June 1940 to allow the Soviet Union to absorb Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina, 
which were part of Romania. In short, the Soviet Union made substantial territorial gains in eastern Europe between the summers of 1939 and 1940. 
Nevertheless, Stalin's buck -passing str ategy came up short in the spring of 1940 when the 
Wehrmacht overran France in six weeks and pushed the British army off the continent at 
Dunkirk. Nazi Germany was now more powerful than ever and it was free to invade the Soviet 
Union with out having to worry much about its western flank. Recalling how Stalin and his 
lieutenants reacted to news of the debacle on the western front, Nikita Khrushchev wrote, 
"Stalin's nerves cracked when he learned about the fall of France. . . . The most pressing and 
deadly t hreat in all history faced the Soviet Union. We felt as though we were facing the threat 
all by ourselves."
73 The German onslaught came a year later, on June 22, 1941. 
The Soviet Union suffered enormous losses in the early years of World War II but eventually 
turned the tide against the Third Reich and began launching major offensives westward, toward 
Berlin, in early 1943. The Red Army, however, was not simply concerned with defeating the 
Wehrmacht and recapturing lost Soviet territory. Stalin was also det ermined to conquer territory 
in Eastern Europe that the Soviets would dominate after Germany was defeated.74 The Red 
Army had to conquer Poland and the Baltic states to defeat the German army, but the Soviets 
also launched major military operations to capture Bulgaria, Hungary, and Romania, even 
though those offensives were not essential for defeating Germany and probably delayed the 
final victory. 
The Soviet Union's appetite for power and influence in Northeast Asia was also evident 
during World War II. I n fact, Stalin managed to win back more territory than Russia had 
controlled in the Far East before its defeat by Japan in 1905. The Soviets had managed to keep 
out of the Pacific war until the final days of that conflict, when the Red Army attacked Japan' s 
Kwantung Army in Manchuria on August 9, 1945. This Soviet offensive was in large part a 
response to long- standing pressure from the United States to join the war against Japan after 
Germany was defeated. Stalin, however, demanded a price for Soviet parti cipation, and 
Winston Churchill and Franklin Roosevelt responded by striking a secret deal with him at Yalta 
in February 1945.75 For joining the fight against Japan, the Soviets were promised the Kurile 
Islands and the southern half of Sakhalin Island. In Manchuria, they were given a lease on Port 
Arthur as a naval base and recognition of the Soviet Union's "preeminent interests" over the 
commercial port of Dairen and the region's two most important railroads. 
No firm decision was reached on Korea's future during World War II, although the Red Army 
occupied the northern part of that country during the closing days of the conflict.76 In December 
1945, the United States and the Soviet Union effectively agreed to jointly administer Korea as a 
trusteeship. But t hat plan fell apart quickly, and in February 1946, Stalin began building a client 
state in North Korea. The United States did the same in South Korea. 
With Germany and Japan in ruins, the Soviet Union emerged from World War II as a 
potential hegemon in Eur ope and Northeast Asia. If it were possible, the Soviets surely would 
have moved to dominate both of those regions. Indeed, if ever a state had good reason to want to rule over Europe it was the Soviet Union in 1945. It had been invaded twice by Germany ov er 
a thirty -year period, and each time Germany made its vic tim pay an enormous blood price. No 
responsible Soviet leader would have passed up an opportunity to be Europe's hegemon in the wake of World War II. 
Hegemony was not feasible, however, for two reasons. First, given the enormous amount of 
damage the Third Reich inflicted on Soviet society, Stalin had to concentrate on rebuilding and 
recovering after 1945, not fighting another war. Thus, he cut the size of the Soviet military from 
12.5 million troops at the end of World War II to 2.87 million by 1948.
77 Second, the United 
States was an enormously wealthy country that had no intention of allowing the Soviet Union to dominate either Europe or Northeast Asia.
78 
In light of these constraints, Stalin soug ht to expand Soviet influence as far as possible 
without provoking a shooting war with the United States and its allies.79 Actually, the available 
evidence indicates that he hoped to avoid an intense security competition with the United 
States, although he was not successful in that endeavor. In short, Stalin was a cautious 
expansionist during the early part of the Cold War. His four main targets were Iran, Turkey, Eastern Europe, and South Korea. 
The Soviets occupied northern Iran during World War II, whil e the British and the Americans 
occupied southern Iran.
80 All three great pow ers agreed at the time to evacuate Iran within six 
months after the war against Japan ended. The United States pulled its troops out on January 1, 1946, and British troops were on schedule to come out by March 2, 1946. Moscow, however, made no move to leave Iran. Furthermore, it was supporting separatist movements among both 
the Azeri and the Kurdish pop ulations in northern Iran, as well as Iran's communist Tudeh Party. 
Both the United Kingdom and the United States put pressure on Stalin to remove his troops 
from Iran, which he did in the spring of 1946. 
Regarding Turkey, which was neutral during World War II until March 1945, Stalin 
demanded in June 1945 that the Turkish provinc es of Ardahan and Kars, which had been part 
of Russia from 1878 to 1918, be given back to the Soviet Union.81 He also asked for military 
bases on Turkish territory so that the Soviets could help control the Dardanelles, the Turkish 
straits linking the Blac k Sea with the Mediterranean Sea. In support of these demands, Stalin 
massed Soviet troops on the Turkish bor der at one point. But these wants were never realized 
because the United States was determined to prevent Soviet expansion in the eastern 
Mediterr anean. 
The principal realm of Soviet expansion in the early Cold War was Eastern Europe, and 
almost all of it was due to the fact that the Red Army conquered most of the area in the final stages of World War II. Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania were formally incorporated into the Soviet 
Union after the war, as was the eastern one- third of Poland, part of East Prussia, Bessarabia, 
northern Bukovina, Czechoslovakia's eastern province of Subcarpathian Ruthenia, and three 
slices of territory on Finland's eastern border (see Map 6.3). Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, and 
Romania were turned into satellite states immediately after the war. Czechoslovakia suf fered 
the same fate in February 1948, and a year later the Soviets created another satellite state in East Germany. 
Finland and Yugoslavia were the only states in Eastern Europe to escape complete Soviet 
domination. Their good fortune was due mainly to two factors. First, both states had clearly 
demonstrated in World War II that it would be difficult and costly for the Soviet army to conquer 
and occupy them for an extended period of time. The Soviet Union, which was attempting to 
recover from the massive damage it had suffered at the hands of the Nazis, already had its 
hands full occupying the other states in Eastern Europe. Thus, it was inclined to avoid costly 
operations in Finland and Yugoslavia. Second, both states were willing to maintain a neutral 
position in the East -West conflict, which meant that they were not a mili tary threat to the Soviet 
Union. If either Fi nland or Yugoslavia had shown an inclination to ally with NATO, the Soviet 
army probably would have invaded it.
82 
The Soviet Union also attempted to gain power and influence in Northeast Asia during the 
early Cold War, although that region clearly received less attention than did Europe.83 Despite 
some distrust between Stalin and Mao, the Soviets provided aid to the Chinese Communists in their fight against the Nationalist forces under Chiang Kai -shek. The Chinese Communists won 
the civil war in 1949 and allied with the Soviet Union against the United States. One year later, the Soviets supported North Korea's invasion of South Korea, which led to a three -year war that 
left Korea divided along roughly the same line that had divided it before the war.
84 
By the early 1950s, the United States and its allies around the globe had a formidable 
containment policy firmly in place, and there was little opportunity for further Soviet expansion in 
Europe, Northeast Asia, or the Pers ian Gulf. In fact, Stalin's decision to back North Korea's 
invasion of South Korea in late June 1950 was the last case of Soviet -sponsored aggression in 
any of those critically important areas for the remainder of the Cold War. Soviet efforts at 
expansion between 1950 and 1990 were confined to the Third World, where it met with 
occasional success, but always with firm resistance from the United States.85 
After decades of competition with the United States for control over Europe, the Soviet 
Union suddenly r eversed course in 1989 and abandoned its empire in Eastern Europe. That 
bold move effectively brought the Cold War to an end. The Soviet Union itself then broke apart into fifteen rem nant states in late 1991. With few exceptions, the first wave of scholar s to study 
these events argued that the Cold War ended because key Soviet leaders, especially Mikhail Gorbachev, underwent a fundamental transfor mation in their thinking about international politics 
during the 1980s.
86 Rather than seeking to maximize the Soviet Union's share of world power, 
Moscow's new thinkers were motivated by the pursuit of economic pros perity and liberal norms 
of restraint in the use of force. Soviet policymak ers, in short, stopped thinking and acting like 
realists and instead adopted a new perspective emphasizing the virtues of cooperation among 
states. 
As more evidence becomes available, however, it is becoming increas ingly apparent that 
the first -wave explanation of Soviet behavior at the end of the Cold War is incomplete, if not 
wrong. The Soviet Union and its empire disappeared in large part because its smokestack 
economy could no longer keep up with the technological progress of the world's major eco nomic 
powers.87 Unless something drastic was done to reverse this eco nomic dec line, the Soviet 
Union's years as a superpower were numbered. 
To fix the problem, Soviet leaders sought to gain access to Western technology by greatly 
reducing East -West security competition in Europe, liberalizing their political system at home, 
and cutt ing their losses in the Third World. But that approach backfired because political 
liberalization unleashed the long- dormant forces of nationalism, causing the Soviet Union itself 
to fall apart.88 In sum, the conventional wisdom from the ini tial wave of s cholarship on the end of 
the Cold War had it backwards: far from abandoning realist principles, the behavior and thinking 
of Soviet leaders reinforce the pattern of history that states seek to maximize their power in 
order to remain secure from international rivals …..89 
 
Self-Defeating Behavior? 
 
The preceding four cases —Japan, Germany, the Soviet Union, and Italy —support the claim 
that great powers seek to increase their share of world power. Moreover, these cases also show 
that great powers are often will ing to use force to achieve that goal. Satiated great powers are 
rare in international politics. This description of how great powers have acted over time is, in fact, not that controversial, even among defensive realists. Jack Snyder, for example, writes that 
"the idea that security can be achieved through expansion is a pervasive theme in the grand strategy of great powers in the industrial era."
108 Furthermore, in Myths of Empire, he offers 
detailed case studies of great -power behavior in the past that p rovide abundant evidence of the 
offensive proclivities of such states. 
One might recognize that history is replete with examples of great pow ers acting 
aggressively but still argue that this behavior cannot be explained by the logic of offensive realism. The basis of this claim, which is common among defensive realists, is that expansion is 
misguided. Indeed, they regard it as a prescription for national suicide. Conquest does not pay, so the argument runs, because states that try to expand ultimately meet defeat. States would be 
wiser to maintain the status quo by pursuing poli cies of "retrenchment, selective appeasement, 
shoring up vital rather than peripheral areas, or simply benign neglect."
109 That states do 
otherwise is evidence of irrational or nons trategic behavior, behavior that cannot be prompted 
by the imperatives of the international system. Rather, this behavior is primarily the result of 
malign domestic political forces.110 
There are two problems with this line of argument. As I have already discussed, the 
historical record does not support the claim that conquest hardly ever pays and that aggressors invariably end up worse off than they were before the war. Ex pansion sometimes pays big 
dividends; at other times it does not. Furthermore, the cl aim that great powers behave 
aggressively because of pernicious domestic politics is hard to sustain, because all kinds of 
states with very different kinds of political systems have adopted offensive military policies. It is 
not even the case that there is at least one type of political system or culture—including 
democracy — that routinely eschews aggression and works instead to defend the status quo. 
Nor does the record indicate that there are especially dangerous peri ods—for example, the 
nuclear age—duri ng which great powers sharply curtail their offensive tendencies. To argue that 
expansion is inherently misguided implies that all great powers over the past 350 years have 
failed to comprehend how the international system works. This is an implausi ble ar gument on its 
face. 
There is a more sophisticated fallback position, however, that may be discerned in the 
writings of the defensive realists.
111 Although they usu ally argue that conquest rarely pays, they 
also admit on other occasions that aggression suc ceeds a good part of the time. Building on 
that more variegated perspective, they divide the universe of aggressors into "expanders" and 
"overexpanders." Expanders are basically the smart aggressors who win wars. They recognize 
that only limited expansion makes good strategic sense. Attempts to dominate an entire region 
are likely to be self -defeating, because balancing coalitions invariably form against states with 
large appetites, and such states end up suffering dev astating defeats. Expanders might 
occa sionally start a losing war, but once they see the writing on the wall, they quickly retreat in 
the face of defeat. In essence, they are "good learners."112 For defensive realists, Bismarck is 
the archetypical smart aggressor, because he won a series of wars without committing the fatal 
error of trying to become a European hegemon. The former Soviet Union is also held up as an 
example of an intelligent aggressor, mainly because it had the good sense not to try to conquer 
all of Europe. 
Overexpanders, on the other hand, are the irrational aggressors who start losing wars yet do 
not have the good sense to quit when it becomes apparent that they are doomed to lose. In 
particular, they are the great powers who recklessly pursue regional hegemony, which invariabl y 
leads to their own catastrophic defeat. Defensive realists contend that these states should know better, because it is clear from history that the pursuit of hege mony almost always fails. This 
self-defeating behavior, so the argument goes, must be the r esult of warped domestic politics. 
Defensive realists usu ally point to three prominent overexpanders: Wilhelmine Germany from 
1890 to 1914, Nazi Germany from 1933 to 1941, and imperial Japan from 1937 to 1941. Each of 
these aggressors started a war that l ed to a devastat ing loss. It is not an exaggeration say that 
the claim that offensive military policies lead to self -defeating behavior rests primarily on these 
three cases. 
The main problem with this "moderation is good" perspective is that it mistakenly equates 
irrational expansion with military defeat. The fact that a great power loses a war does not necessarily mean that the decision to initiate it was the result of an ill -informed or irrational 
decision- making process. States should not start wars that they are certain to lose, of course, 
but it is hard to predict with a high degree of certainty how wars will turn out. After a war is over, pundits and scholars often assume that the outcome was obvious from the start; hindsight is 20 -
20. In practice, however, forecasting is difficult, and states sometimes guess wrong and get punished as a result. Thus, it is possible for a rational state to initiate a war that it ultimately 
loses. 
The best way to determine whether an aggressor such as Japan or Germany was engaged 
in self -defeating behavior is to focus on the deci sion-making process that led it to initiate war, 
not the outcome of the conflict. A careful analysis of the Japanese and German cases reveals 
that, in each instance, the decision for war was a r easonable response to the par ticular 
circumstances each state faced. As the discussion below makes clear, these were not irrational decisions fueled by malign political forces on the home front. 
There are also problems with the related argument that pursuing regional hegemony is akin 
to tilting at windmills. To be sure, the United States is the only state that has attempted to 
conquer its region and suc ceeded. Napoleonic France, Wilhelmine Germany, Nazi Germany, 
and imperial Japan all tried but failed. One out of five is not an impressive suc cess rate. Still, the 
American case demonstrates that it is possible to achieve regional hegemony. There are also 
examples of success from the distant past: the Roman Empir e in Europe (133 B.C .,-235 A.D..), 
the Mughal Dynasty on the South Asian subcontinent (1556- 1707), and the Ch'ing Dynasty in 
Asia (1683- 1839), to name a few. Furthermore, even though Napoleon, Kaiser Wilhelm, and 
Hitler all lost their bids to dominate Europe, each won major battlefield victories, con quered 
huge tracts of terri tory, and came close to achieving their goals. Only Japan stood little chance 
of winning hegemony on the battlefield. But as we shall see, Japanese poli cymakers knew that 
they would probably lose, and went to war only because the United States left them with no 
reasonable alternative. 
Critics of offensive policies claim that balancing coalitions form to defeat aspiring hegemons, 
but history shows that such coalitions are diffi cult to put together in a timely and efficient 
manner . Threatened states prefer to buck -pass to each other rather than form an alliance 
against their dangerous foe. For example, the balancing coalitions that finished off Napoleonic 
France and Nazi Germany came together only after these aggressors had conquer ed much of 
Europe. Moreover, in both cases, the defensive alliances did not form until after the drive for 
hegemony had been blunted by a significant military defeat in Russia, which effectively fought 
both Napoleon and Hitler without allies.113 The diffic ulty of con structing effective defensive 
alliances sometimes provides powerful states with opportunities for aggression. 
Finally, the claim that great powers should have learned from the his torical record that 
attempts at regional hegemony .are doomed is not persuasive. Not only does the American 
case contradict the basic point, but it is hard to apply the argument to the first states that made 
a run at regional hegemony. After all, they had few precedents, and the evidence from the 
earliest cases was mix ed. Wilhelmine Germany, for example, could look at both Napoleonic 
France, which failed, and the United States, which succeeded. It is hard to argue that German 
policymakers should have read history to say that they were sure to lose if they attempted to 
conquer Europe. One might concede that point but argue that Hitler certainly should have 
known better, because he could see that Wilhelmine Germany as well as Napoleonic France 
had failed to conquer Europe. But, as discussed below, what Hitler learned from those cases 
was not that aggression did not pay, but rather that he should not repeat his predecessor's 
mistakes when the Third Reich made its run at hegemony. Learning, in other words, does not 
always lead to choosing a peaceful outcome. 
Thus, the pursuit of regional hegemony is not a quixotic ambition, although there is no 
denying that it is difficult to achieve. Since the security benefits of hegemony are enormous, 
powerful states will invariably be tempted to emulate the United States and try to dominate their 
region of the world….. 
 
The Nuclear Arms Race 
 
My final test of offensive realism is to examine whether its prediction that great powers seek 
nuclear superiority is correct. The opposing position, which is closely identified with the defensive realists, is that once nuclear -armed rivals find themselves operating in a MAD world—
that is, a world in which each side has the capability to destroy the other side after absorbing a 
first strike —they should willingly accept the status quo and not pursue nu clear advantage. 
States should therefore not build counterforce weapons or defensive systems that could 
neutralize the other side's retaliatory capability and undermine MAD. An examination of the 
superpowers' nuclear policies during the Cold War thus prov ides an ideal case for assess ing 
these competing realist perspectives. 
The historical record makes it clear that offensive realism better accounts for the nuclear 
policies of the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War. Neither superpower 
accepted the defensive realists' advice about the virtues of MAD. Instead, both sides developed 
and deployed large, sophisticated counterforce arsenals, either to gain nuclear advantage or to 
prevent the other side from doing so. Moreover, both sides sought to devel op defenses against 
the other side's nuclear weapons, as well as elaborate clever strategies for fighting and winning 
a nuclear war. 
 
U.S. Nuclear Policy 
 
The nuclear arms race between the superpowers did not become serious until about 1950. 
The United States enjoyed a nuclear monopoly in the early years of the Cold War, and the 
Soviet Union did not explode its first nuclear device until August 1949. Thus, concepts such as 
counterforce were irrelevant in the late 1940s, because the Soviets had no nuclear weapons for 
the United States to target. The main concern of American strategists during this period was 
how to stop the Red Army from overrun ning Western Europe. They believed that the best way 
to deal with that threat was to launch a nuclear bom bing campaign against the Soviet indus trial 
base.155 In essence, the strategy was "an extension" of the American strategic bombing 
campaign against Germany in World War II, although "greatly compressed in time, magnified in 
effect, and reduced in cost."156 
After the Soviets developed the atomic bomb, the United States sought to develop a 
splendid first -strike capability —that is, a strike that would pre emptively destroy all of the Soviets' 
nuclear capabilities in one fell swoop. American nuclear policy dur ing the 1950s was called 
"massive retaliation," although that label was probably a misnomer, since the word "retaliation" 
implies that the United States planned to wait to strike the Soviet Union until after absorbing a 
Soviet nuclear strike.157 In fact, t here is considerable evidence that the United States intended to 
launch its nuclear weapons first in a crisis in order to eliminate the small Soviet nuclear force before it could get off the ground. General Curtis LeMay, the head of the Strategic Air Command 
(SAC), made this point clear in the mid- 1950s, when he declared that the vulnerability of SAC's 
bombers —a cause for worry at the time—did not concern him much, because his script for a 
nuclear war called for the United States to strike first and disarm the Soviet Union. "If I see that 
the Russians are amassing their planes for an attack," he said, "I'm going to kick the shit out of 
them before they take off the ground."
158 It would thus be more accurate to define U.S. nuclear 
policy in the 1950s as "massive preemption" rather than massive retaliation. Regardless, the key point is that during the 1950s, the United States was committed to gaining nuclear superiority over the Soviet Union. 
Nevertheless, the United States did not achieve a first -strike capability against the Soviet 
nuclear arsenal during either the 1950s or the early 1960s. Granted, had the United States 
struck first in a nuclear exchange during that period, it would have inflicted much greater 
damage on the Soviet Union than vice versa. And American planners certainly did put forth plausible best -case scenario s in which a U.S. first strike eliminated almost all of the Soviet 
Union's nuclear retaliatory force, th us raising doubts about whether Moscow truly had an 
assured- destruction capabili ty.
159 The United States, in other words, was close to having a first -
strike capability. Still, most American policymakers at the time believed that the United States was like ly to suffer unacceptable damage in a nuclear war with the Soviet Union, even if that 
damage fell short of total destruction of the United States.
160 
By the early 1960s, however, it was readily apparent that the growing size and diversity of 
the Soviet nuc lear arsenal meant that it would soon be impossible, given existing technology, for 
the United States seriously to contemplate disarming the Soviet Union with a nuclear first strike.
161 Moscow was on the verge of developing an invulnerable and robust sec ond-strike 
capability, which would put the superpowers squarely in a MAD world. How did American 
policymakers view this development, and how did they respond to it? They were not only deeply 
unhappy about it, but for the remainder of the Cold War, they devoted considerable resources to 
escaping MAD and gaining a, nuclear advantage over the Soviet Union. 
Consider the sheer number of Soviet targets that the United States was planning to strike in 
a nuclear war, a number that went far beyond the requirements of MAD. It was generally agreed 
that to have an assured- destruction capability, the United States, after absorbing a Soviet first 
strike, had to be able to destroy about 30 percent of the Soviet Union's population and about 70 percent of its industry.
162 That level of destruc tion could have been achieved by destroying the 
200 largest cities in the Soviet Union. This task required about 400 one -megaton weapons, or 
an equivalent mix of weapons and megatonnage (hereinafter referred to as 400 EMT). 
However, the actual number of Soviet targets that the United States planned to destroy far 
exceeded the 200 cities required for assured destruction. For example, SIOP -5, the actual 
military plan for employing nuclear weapons that took effect on January 1, 1976, listed 25,000 
poten tial targets.163 SIOP -6, which the Reagan administration approved on October 1, 1983, 
contained a staggering 50,000 potential targets. 
Although the United States never acquired the capability to hit all of those potential targets 
at once, it deployed a huge arsenal of nuclear weapons, which grew steadily in size from the early 1960s until the Cold War ended in 1990. Moreover, most of those weapons had significant counterforce capability, because American strategic planners were not con tent mer ely to 
incinerate 200 Soviet cities, but were determined to destroy a large portion of the Soviet Union's retaliatory capability as well. For example, 3,127 nuclear bombs and warheads were in the U.S. 
inventory in December 1960, when SIOP -62 (the first SIO P) was approved.
164 Twenty -three 
years later, when SIOP -6 was put into effect, the strategic nuclear arsenal had grown to include 
10,802 weapons. Although the United States needed a reasonably large retaliatory force for assured- destruction purpos es—because it had to assume that some of its nuclear weapons 
might be lost to a Soviet first strike— there is no question that the size of the American nuclear 
arsenal during the last twenty -five years of the Cold War went far beyond the 400 EMT required 
to destroy 200 Soviet cities. 
The United States also pushed hard to develop technologies that would give it an advantage 
at the nuclear level. For example, it went to consider able lengths to improve the lethality of its 
counterforce weapons. The United States was especially concerned with improving missile 
accuracy, a concern that its weapons designers allayed with great success. America also 
pioneered the development of MIRVs (multiple independently target ed re- entry vehicles), which 
allowed it to increase signifi cantly the number of strategic warheads in its inventory. By the end 
of the Cold War, the "hard- target kill capability" of U.S. ballistic missiles —that is, U.S. counter -
force capability —had reached the point at which the survivability of the Soviets' land- based 
missile silos was in question. Washington also invested heavily in protecting its command- and-
control systems from attack, thus augmenting its capability to wage a controlled nuclear war. In 
addition, the United States pushed hard, if unsuccessfully, to develop effective bal listic missile 
defenses. American policymakers sometimes said that the ultimate purpose of missile defense 
was to move away from a nuclear world that prized offense to a safer, defense- dominant world, 
but the truth is that they wanted defenses in order to facilitate winning a nuclear war at a 
reasonable cost.
165 
Finally, the United States came up with an alternative to the strategy of massive retaliation 
that, it hoped, would allow it to wage and win a nuclear war against the Soviet Union. This alternative strategy was first formulated by the Kennedy administration in 1961 and came to be 
known as "limited nuclear options."
166 The new policy assumed that neither super power could 
eliminate the other side's assured -destruction capabil ity, but that they could still engage in 
limited nu clear exchanges with their counterforce weapons. The United States would aim to 
avoid striking Soviet cities so as to limit civilian deaths and would concentrate instead on 
achieving victory by dominating the Soviet Union in the limited counter -force exchanges that 
were at the heart of the strategy. It was hoped that the Soviets would fight according to the 
same rules. This new policy was codified in SIOP -63, which took effect on August 1, 1962. 
There were four important successor SIOPs over the remainder of the Cold War, and each new 
SIOP essentially provided smaller, more precise, and more select counterforce options than its 
predecessor, as well as command -and-control improvements that would facilitate fi ghting a 
limited nuclear war.167 The ultimate aim of these refinements, of course, was to ensure that the 
United States had an advantage over the Soviet Union in a nuclear war.168 
In sum, the evidence is overwhelming that the United States did not abandon its efforts to 
gain nuclear superiority during the last twenty -five years of the Cold War.169 Nevertheless, it did 
not gain a meaningful advantage over the Soviets. In fact, it did not come as close to achieving 
that goal as it had during the 1950s and ear ly 1960s. 
 
Soviet Nuclear Policy 
 
Although we know less about the Soviet side of the story than we do about the American 
side, it is not difficult to determine whether the Soviets sought nuclear advantage over the United States or were content to live in a MAD world. We not only have details on the size and 
composi tion of the Soviet nuclear arsenal during the course of the Cold War, but also have 
access to a large body of Soviet literature that lays out Moscow's thinking on nuclear strategy. 
The Soviet Uni on, like the United States, built a massive nuclear arse nal with abundant 
counterforce capability.
170 The Soviets, however, were late bloomers. They did not explode their 
first nuclear weapon until August 1949, and their arsenal grew slowly in the 1950s. During that 
decade, the Soviet Union lagged behind the United States in developing and deploying nuclear weapons, as well as the systems to deliver them. By 1960 the Soviet inventory contained only 
354 strategic nuclear weapons, compared to 3,127 for the U nited States.
171 But the Soviet force 
grew rapidly during the 1960s. By 1970 it numbered 2,216; ten years later it num bered 7,480. 
Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev's "new thinking" notwithstanding, the Soviet Union added 
almost 4,000 bombs and war heads to its nuclear inventory during the 1980s, ending up with 
11,320 strategic nuclear weapons in 1989, the year the Berlin Wall came down. 
Furthermore, most Soviet strategists apparently believed that their country had to be 
prepared to fight and win a nucl ear war.172 This is not to say that Soviet leaders were eager to 
fight such a war or that they were confident that they could gain a meaningful victory. Soviet 
strategists understood that nuclear war would involve untold destruction.173 But they were 
deter mined to limit damage to the Soviet Union and prevail in any nuclear exchange between 
the superpowers. There is little evidence to suggest that Soviet leaders bought the defensive 
realists' arguments about the virtues of MAD and the dangers of counterforce. 
American and Soviet strategists did differ, however, on the question of how best to win a 
nuclear war. It is apparent that Soviet planners never accepted U.S. thinking about limited 
nuclear options.174 Instead, they seemed to favor a targeting policy much like the U.S. policy of 
massive retaliation from the 1950s. Specifically, they maintained that the best way to wage a 
nuclear war and limit damage to the Soviet Union was to launch a rapid and massive 
counterforce strike against the entire war -making capacity of the United States and its allies. 
The Soviets did not emphasize targeting American civilians, as assured destruction demands, although a full -scale nuclear strike against the United States certainly would have killed many 
millions of Americans. 
Thus it seems that both superpowers went to considerable lengths dur ing the Cold War to 
build huge counterforce nuclear arsenals so that they could gain nuclear advantage over the 
other. Neither side was content merely to build and maintain an assured- destruction capability. 
 
Misunderstanding the Nuclear Revolution 
 
One may recognize that the superpowers relentlessly sought nuclear superiority but still 
argue that this behavior was misguided, if not irra tional, and that it cannot be explained by 
balance- of-power logic. Neither side could possibly have gained meaningful nuclear advantage 
over the other, and, what is more, MAD makes for a highly stable world. Thus, the pursuit of 
nuclear superiority must hav e been the result of bureaucratic politics or dysfunctional domestic 
politics in both the United States and the Soviet Union. This perspective is held by most 
defensive realists, who recognize that neither superpower accepted its own claims about the 
merits of MAD and the evils of counterforce.
175 
It is not easy to apply this line of argument to the 1950s and the early 1960s, because the 
small size of the Soviet arsenal during that period gave the United States a real chance of 
gaining nuclear superiority. Indeed, some experts believe that the United States did have a 
"splendid first -strike" capability against the Soviet Union.176 I disagree with this assess ment, but 
there is little question that during the early Cold War the United States would have suffe red 
much less damage than its rival in a nuclear exchange. The defensive realists' best case thus 
covers roughly the last twenty -five years of the Cold War, when both the United States and the 
Soviet Union had an unambiguous assured- destruction capability. Yet even during this period of 
strategic parity, each superpower still sought to gain a nuclear advantage over the other. 
To begin with, the broad contours of strategic nuclear policy are consis tent with the 
predictions of offensive realism. Specifically , the United States worked hardest at gaining 
nuclear superiority in the 1950s, when a first -strike capability was arguably within its grasp. 
Once the Soviet Union approached a secure retaliatory capability, however, the U.S. effort to gain superiority slackened, although it did not disappear. Although American policymakers 
never embraced the logic of assured destruction, the per centage of U.S. defense spending 
devoted to strategic nuclear forces declined steadily after I960.
177 Moreover, both sides agreed 
not to deploy significant ballistic missile defenses and eventually placed qualitative and quantitative limits on their offensive forces as well. The nuclear arms race continued in a 
number of different ways, some of which were described above, but neither side made an all -out 
effort to acquire superiority once MAD was in place. 
Moreover, the continuation of the arms race was not misguided, even though nuclear 
superiority remained an elusive goal. In fact, it made good strategic sense for the United States 
and the Soviet Union to compete vigorously in the nuclear realm, because military technology tends to develop rapidly and in unforeseen ways. For example, few people in 1914 under stood 
that the submarine would become a deadly and effective weapon during World War I. Few in 
1965 foresaw how the brewing revolution in information technology would profoundly affect 
conventional weapons such as fighter aircraft and tanks. The key point is that nobody could say for sure in 1965 whether some revolutionary new t echnology might not transform the nuclear 
balance and give one side a clear advantage. 
Furthermore, military competitions are usually characterized by what Robert Pape has called 
an "asymmetric diffusion of military technology."
178 States do not acquire ne w technologies 
simultaneously, which means that the innovator often gains significant, albeit temporary, 
advantages over the laggard. Throughout the Cold War, for example, the United States 
maintained a significant advantage in developing technologies to detect the other side's 
submarines and to hide its own. 
Great powers always prefer to be the first to develop new technologies; they have to make 
sure that their opponents do not beat them to the punch and gain the advantage for themselves. Thus, it made sense for each superpower to make a serious effo rt to develop counterforce 
technology and ballistic missile defenses. A t a maximum, a successful break through might have 
brought clear superiority; at a minimum, these efforts prevented the other side from gaining a 
unilateral advantage. In short, given the strategic benefits that come with nuclear superiority, 
and the fact that it was hard to know throughout the Cold War whether it was achievable, it was 
neither illogical nor surprising that both superpowers pu rsued it. 
 
Conclusion 
 
The nuclear arms race between the superpowers and the foreign policy behavior of Japan 
(1868- 1945), Germany (1862- 1945), the Soviet Union (1917- 91), and Italy (1861- 1943) show 
that great powers look for opportunities to shift the balance of power in their favor and usually 
seize opportunities when they appear. Moreover, these cases support my claims that states do 
not lose their appetite for power as they gain more of it, and that especially powerful states are 
strongly inclined to seek regional hegemony. J apan, Germany, and the Soviet Union, for 
example, all set more ambitious foreign policy goals and behaved more aggressively as their power increased. In fact, both Japan and Germany fought wars in an attempt to dominate their 
areas of the world. Although t he Soviet Union did not follow suit, that was because it was 
deterred by American military might, not because it was a satiated great power. 
The fallback argument, which allows that the major states have relentlessly pursued power 
in the past but character izes this pursuit as self -defeating behavior caused by destructive 
domestic politics, is not persuasive. Aggression is not always counterproductive. States that 
initiate wars often win and frequently improve their strategic position in the process. 
Further more, the fact that so many different kinds of great powers have sought to gain 
advantage over their rivals over such broad spans of history renders implausible the claim that this was all foolish or irrational behav ior brought about by domestic pathologies. A close look at 
the cases that might seem to be prime examples of aberrant strategic behavior —the final 
twenty -five years of the nuclear arms race, imperial Japan, Wilhelmine Germany, and Nazi 
Germany —suggests otherwise. Although domestic politics played some role in all of these 
cases, each state had good reason to try to gain advantage over its rivals and good reason to think that it would succeed. 
For the most part, the cases discussed in this chapter involve great pow ers taking active 
measures to gai n advantage over their opponents —exact ly what offensive realism predicts. Let 
us now turn to the American and British cases, which seem at first glance t o provide evidence of 
great pow ers ignoring opportunities to gain power. As we shall see, however, each of these 
cases in fact provides further support for the theory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Nine 
The Causes of Great Power War 
 
Security competition is endemic to daily life in the international sys tem, but war is not. Only 
occasionally does security competition give way to war. This chapter will offer a structural theory 
that accounts for that deadly shift. In effect, I seek to explain the causes of great -power war, 
defined as any conflict involving at least one great power. 
One might surmise that international anarchy is the key structural fac tor that causes states 
to fight wars. After all, the best way for states to sur vive in an anarchic system in which other 
states have some offensive capabilit y and intentions that might be hostile is to have more rather 
than less power. This logic, explained in Chapter 2, drives states to strive to maximize their share of world power, which sometimes means going to war against a rival state. There is no 
question that anarchy is a deep cause of war. G. Lowes Dickinson put this point well in his 
account of what caused World War I: "Some one state at any moment may be the immedi ate 
offender; but the main and permanent offence is common to all states. It is the ana rchy which 
they are all responsible for perpetuating."
1 
Anarchy alone, however, cannot account for why security competi tion sometimes leads to 
war but sometimes does not. The problem is that anarchy is a constant —the system is always 
anarchic —whereas war is not. To account for this important variation in state behavior, it is nec -
essary to consider another structural variable: the distribution of power among the leading states in the system. As discussed in Chapter g, power in the international system is usually 
arranged in three different ways: bipolarity, balanced multipolarity, and unbalanced multipolarity. 
Thus, to explore the effect of the distribution of power on the likelihood of war, we need to know whether the system is bipolar or multipolar, and i f it is multipolar, whether or not there is a 
potential hegemon among the great powers. The core of my argument is that bipolar sys tems 
tend to be the most peaceful, and unbalanced multipolar systems are the most prone to deadly 
conflict. Balanced multipolar sy stems fall somewhere in between. 
Structural theories such as offensive realism are at best crude predictors of when security 
competition leads to war. They are not capable of explaining precisely how often war will occur in one kind of system com pared to another. Nor are they capable of predicting exactly when 
wars will occur. For example, according to offensive realism, the emergence of Germany as a potential hegemon in the early 1900s made it likely that there would be a war involving all the 
European great powers. But the theory cannot explain why war occur red in 1914 rather than 
1912 or 1916.
2 
These limitations stem from the fact that nonstructural factors some times play an important 
role in determining whether or not a state goes to war. States usually do not fight wars for 
security reasons alone. As noted in Chapter 2, for instance, although Otto von Bismarck was 
driven in good part by realist calculations when he took Prussia to war three times between 
1864 and 1870, each of his decisions for w ar was also influenced by nationalism and other 
domestic political calculations. And yet structural forces do exert a powerful influence on state behavior. It can be no other way if states care deeply about their survival. Thus, focusing 
exclusively on str ucture should tell us a lot about the origins of great -power war. 
Many theories about the causes of war have been propounded, which is not surprising, 
since the subject has always been of central importance to students of international politics. 
Some of those theories treat human nature as the taproot of conflict, while others focus on 
individual leaders, domestic politics, political ideology, capitalism, economic interdepend ence, 
and the structure of the international system.
3 In fact, a handful of prom inent theories point to 
the distribution of power as the key to under standing international conflict. For example, 
Kenneth Waltz maintains that bipolarity is less prone to war than multipolarity, whereas Karl 
Deutsch and J. David Singer argue the opposite.4 Other scholars focus not on the polarity of the 
system, but on whether there is a preponderant power in the system. Classical realists such as 
Hans Morgenthau argue that peace is most likely when there is no dominant power, but instead 
a rough balance o f power among the leading states. In contrast, Robert Gilpin and A.F.K. 
Organski argue that the presence of a preponderant power fosters stability.5 
Offensive realism, which takes into account polarity as well as the bal ance of power among 
the leading states in the system, agrees that bipolar ity is more stable than multipolarity but goes 
beyond that assertion by distinguishing between multipolar systems with or without a potential hegemon. This distinction between balanced and unbalanced multipolar system s, I argue, is 
important for understanding the history of great -power war. Offensive realism also agrees with 
the classical realists' claim that peace is more likely if there is no preponderant power in the 
system, but it goes beyond that perspective by em phasizing that stability also depends on 
whether the system is bipolar or multipolar. 
Showing how offensive realism explains great -power war involves a two- step process. In the 
next three sections, I spell out my theory and show that the causal logic under pinning it is sound 
and compelling. In the subsequent two sections, the theory is tested to see how well it explains 
both the outbreak of great -power war and the periods of relative peace in Europe between 1792 
and 1990. Specifically, I look to see how muc h great -power war there was during the periods 
when Europe was charac terized by bipolarity, by balanced multipolarity, and by unbalanced 
multi- polarity. Finally, my brief conclusion discusses how the presence of nuclear weapons 
during the Cold War affects the analysis. 
 
Structure and War 
 
The main causes of war are located in the architecture of the interna tional system. What 
matters most is the number of great powers and how much power each controls. A system can 
be either bipolar or multipolar, and pow er can be distributed more or less evenly among the 
leading states. The power ratios among all the great powers affect the prospects for stability, but the key ratio is that between the two most formidable states in the system. If there is a lopsided 
power gap, the number one state is a potential hegemon.
6 A system that contains an aspiring 
hegemon is said to be unbalanced; a system without such a dominant state is said to be 
balanced. Power need not be distributed equally among all the major states in a balanced 
system, although it can be. The basic requirement for balance is that there not be a marked difference in power between the two leading states. If there is, the system is unbalanced. 
Combining these two dimensions of power produces four possible kinds of sy stems: 1) 
unbalanced bipolarity, 2) balanced bipolarity, 3) unbalanced multipolarity, and 4) balanced multipolarity. Unbalanced bipolarity is not a useful category, because this kind of system is 
unlikely to be found in the real world. I know of none in modern times. It is cer tainly possible that 
some region might find itself with just two great pow ers, one of which is markedly more powerful 
than the other. But that sys tem is likely to disappear quickly, because the stronger state is likely 
to conquer its weaker rival, who would have no other great power to turn to for help, since by 
definition there are no other great powers. In fact, the weaker power might even capitul ate 
without a fight, making the more powerful state a regional hegemon. In short, unbalanced 
bipolar systems are so unstable that they cannot last for any appreciable period of time. 
Thus we are likely to find power apportioned among the leading states in three different 
patterns. Bipolar systems (this is shorthand for balanced bipolarity) are ruled by two great 
powers that have roughly equal strength—or at least neither state is decidedly more powerful 
than the other. Unbalanced multipolar sy stems are domi nated by three or more great powers, 
one of which is a potential hegemon. Balanced multipolar systems are dominated by three or 
more great powers, none of which is an aspiring hegemon: there is no significant gap in military 
strength between the system's l eading two states, although some power asymme tries are likely 
to exist among the great powers. 
How do these different distributions of power affect the prospects for war and peace? 
Bipolar systems are the most stable of the three systems. Great -power wars are infrequent, and 
when they occur, they are likely to involve one of the great powers fighting against a minor 
power, not the rival great power. Unbalanced multipolar systems feature the most dan gerous 
distribution of power, mainly because potential he gemons are like ly to get into wars with all of 
the other great powers in the system. These wars invariably turn out to be' long and enormously costly. Balanced mul tipolar sy stems occupy a middle ground: great -power war is more likely 
than in bipolarity, but decidedly less likel y than in unbalanced multipolar ity. Moreover, the wars 
between the great powers are likely to be one -on-one or two- on-one engagements, not 
systemwide conflicts like those that occur when there is a potential hegemon. 
Let us now cons ider why bipolar systems are more stable than multipo lar systems, 
regardless of whether there is a potential hegemon in the mix. Later I will explain why balanced 
multipolar systems are more stable than unbalanced ones. 
 Bipolarity vs. Multipolarity 
 
War is more likely in multipolarity than bipolarity for three reasons.
7 First, there are more 
opportunities for war, because there are more potential conflict dyads in a multipolar system. 
Second, imbalances of power are more commonplace in a multi polar world, and thus great 
powers are more likely to have the capability to win a war, making deterrence more difficult and 
war more likely. Third, the potential for miscalculation is greater in multipolarity: states might 
think they have the capability to coerce or conquer another state when, in fact, they do not. 
 
Opportunities for War 
 
A multipolar system has more potential conflict situations than does a bipolar order. 
Consider great -great power dyads. Under bipolarity, there are only two great powers and 
therefor e only one conflict dyad directly involving them. For example, the Soviet Union was the 
only great power that the United States could have fought during the Cold War. In contrast, a 
multipolar system with three great powers has three dyads across which war might break out 
between the great powers: A can fight B, A can fight C, and B can fight C. A system with five 
great powers has ten great -great power dyads. 
Conflict could also erupt across dyads involving major and minor pow ers. In setting up a 
hypotheti cal scenario, it seems reasonable to assume the same number of minor powers in both 
the bipolar and multipolar systems, since the number of major powers should have no 
meaningful effect on the number of minor powers. Therefore, because there are more great 
powers in multipolarity, there are more great -minor power dyads. Consider the following 
examples: in a bipolar world with 10 minor powers, there are 20 great -minor power dyads; in a 
multipolar system with 5 great powers and the same 10 minor powers, there are 50 such dyads. 
This disparity in the number of great -minor power dyads in the two systems probably should 
be tilted further in favor of bipolarity, because it is generally less flexible than multipolarity. 
Bipolar systems are likely to be rigid struct ures. Two great powers dominate, and the logic of 
security competition suggests that they will be unambiguous rivals. Most minor powers find it difficult to remain unattached to one of the major powers in bipolarity, because the major powers 
demand allegiance from the smaller states. This tightness is especially true in core geographical 
areas, less so in peripheral areas. The pulling of minor powers into the orbit of one or the other 
great power makes it difficult for either great power to pick a fight wit h minor powers closely 
allied with its adversary; as a result, the numbers of potential conflict situations is substantially less. During the Cold War, for example, the United States was not about to use military 
force against Hungary or Poland, which wer e allied with the Soviet Union. Thus, there 
should probably be substantially fewer than 20 great -minor power dyads in our hypothetical 
bipolar world. 
In contrast, multipolar systems are less firmly structured. The exact form multipolarity takes 
can vary wi dely, depending on the number of major and minor powers in the system and the 
geographical arrangement of those states. Nevertheless, both major and minor powers usually 
have considerable flexibility regarding alliance partners, and minor powers are less l ikely to be 
closely tied to a great power than in a bipolar system. This autonomy, however, leaves minor powers vulnerable to attack from the great powers. Thus, the 50 great -minor power dyads in our 
hypothetical multipolar system is probably a reasonable number. 
Wars between minor powers are largely ignored in this study because the aim is to develop 
a theory of great -power war. Yet minor -power wars sometimes widen and great powers get 
dragged into the fighting. Although the subject of escalation lies outside the scope of this study, a brief word is in order about how polarity affects the likelihood of great powers' getting pulled 
into wars between minor powers. Basically, that possibility is greater in multipolarity than in 
bipolarity, because there ar e more opportunities for minor powers to fight each other in 
multipolarity, and thus more opportunities for great -power involvement. 
Consider that our hypothetical bipolar and multipolar worlds both con tain 10 minor powers, 
which means that there are 45 potential minor -minor power dyads in each system. That number 
should be markedly reduced for bipolarity, because the general tightness of bipolar sy stems 
makes it difficult for minor powers to go. to war against each other. Specifically, both great 
powers w ould seek to prevent fighting between their own minor -power allies, as well as conflicts 
involving minor powers from the rival camps, for fear of escalation. Minor powers have much 
more room to maneuver in a multipolar system, and thus they have more freedom to fight each 
other. Greece and Turkey, for example, fought a war between 1921 and 1924, when Europe 
was multipolar. But they were in no position to fight with each other during the Cold War, when 
Europe was bipolar, because the United States would not have tolerated a war between any of 
its European allies, for fear it would have weakened NATO vis -a-vis the Soviet Union. 
 
Imbalances of Power 
 
Power asymmetries among the great powers are more commonplace in multipolarity than 
bipolarity, and the strong become hard to deter when power is unbalanced, because they have 
increased capability to win wars.
8 But even if we assume that the military strength of the great 
powers is roughly equal, power imbalances that lead to conflict are still more likely in multipolarity than in bipolarity. 
Multipolar systems tend toward inequality, whereas bipolar systems tend toward equality, for 
one principal reason. The more great powers there are in a system, the more likely it is that wealth and population size, the building blocks of military power, will be distributed unevenly 
among them. To illustrate, let us assume that we live in a world where, regardless of how many great powers populate the system, there is a 50 percent chance that any two great powers will 
have roughl y the same amount of latent power. If there are only two great powers in that world 
(bipolarity), obviously there is a 50 percent chance that each state will control the same quantity 
of latent power. But if there are three great powers in that world (mult ipolarity), there is only a 
12.5 percent chance that all of them will have the same amount of latent power. With four great 
powers (mul tipolarity), there is less than a 2 percent chance that the ingredients of military might 
will be distributed evenly among all of them. 
One could use a different number for the likelihood that any two states will have equal 
amounts of latent power —say, 25 percent or 60 percent instead of 50 percent —but the basic 
story would remain the same. Asymmetries in latent power are m ore likely to be found among 
the great powers in multipolarity than in bipolarity, and the more great powers there are in 
multipolarity, the more remote the chances of symmetry. This is not to say that it is impossible to 
have a multipolar system in which the great powers possess equal proportions of latent power, 
but only that it is considerably less likely than in a bipolar system. Of course, the reason for this 
concern with latent power is that significant variations in wealth and population size among t he 
leading states are likely to lead to disparities in actual military power, simply because some 
states will be better endowed to pursue an arms race than are others.9 
But even if we assume that all the major states are equally powerful, imbalances in pow er 
still occur more often in multipolarity than i n bipolarity. Two great powers in a multipolar system, 
for example, can join together to attack a third great power, as the United Kingdom and France 
did against Russia in the Crimean War (1853- 56), and Ital y and Prussia did against Austria in 
1866. This kind of g anging up is impossible in bipolarity, since only two great powers compete. 
Two great powers can also join forces to conquer a minor power, as Austria and Prussia did against Denmark in 1864, and Ger many and the Soviet Union did against Poland in 1939. 
Ganging up of this sort is logically possible in a bipolar world, but it is highly unlikely because the two great powers are almost certain to be archrivals disinclined to go to war as allies. 
Furthermo re, a major power might use its superior strength to coerce or conquer a minor power. 
This kind of behavior is more likely in multipolarity than in bipolarity, because there are more 
potential great -minor power dyads in a multipolar system. 
One might argue that balance- of-power dynamics can operate to counter any power 
imbalances that arise in multipolarity. No state can dominate another if the other states coalesce 
firmly against it.
10 Indeed, this might be seen as an advantage that multipolarity has over 
bipolarity, since great -power balancing coalitions are not feasible in a world with only two great 
powers. But threatened states rarely form effective balanc ing coalitions in time to contain an 
aggressor. As Chapter 8 demonstrated, threatened states prefer buck -passing to balancing, but 
buck -passing directly undermines efforts to build powerful balancing coalitions. 
But even when threatened states do balance together in multipolarity, diplomacy is an 
uncertain process. It can take time to build a defensive coalition, especially if the number of 
states required to form a balancing alliance is large. An aggressor may conclude that it can gain 
its objectives before the opposing coalition is fully formed. Finally, geography some times 
prevents balancing states from putting meaningful pressure on aggressors. For example, a 
major power may not be able to put effective military pressure on a state threatening to cause 
trouble because they are separated from each other by a large body of water or another state.11 
 
The Potential for Miscalculation 
 
A final problem with multipolarity lies in its tendency to foster miscalculation. Multipolarity 
leads states to underestimate the resolve of rival states and the strength of opposing coalitions. States then mistakenly conc lude that they have the military capability to coerce an opponent, or 
if that fails, to defeat it in battle. 
War is more likely when a state underestimates the willingness of an opposing state to stand 
firm on issues of difference. It then may push the other state too far, expecting the other to 
concede when in fact it will choose to fight. Such miscalculation is more likely under multipolarity 
because the shape of the international order tends to remain fluid, due to the tendency of 
coalitions to shift. As a result, the nature of the agreed international rules of the road—norms of 
state behavior, and agreed divi sions of territorial rights and other privileges —tend to change 
constantly. No sooner may the rules of a given adversarial relationship be worked out than that relationship becomes a friendship, a new rivalry emerges with a previous friend or neutral, and 
new rules of the road must be established. Under these circumstances, one state may 
unwittingly push another too far, because ambiguities as to nat ional rights and obligations leave 
a wider range of issues on which each state may misjudge the other's resolve. Norms of state 
behavior can come to be broadly understood and accepted by all states, even in multipolarity, 
just as basic norms of diplomatic con duct became generally accepted by the European powers 
during the eigh teenth century. Nevertheless, a well -defined division of rights is generally more 
difficult when the number of states is large and relations among them are in flux, as is the case 
with multipolarity. 
War is also more likely when states underestimate the relative power of an opposing 
coalition, either because they underestimate the number of states who will oppose them, or 
because they exaggerate the number of allies who will fight on their own side.12 Such errors are 
more likely in a system of many states, since states then must accurately predict the behavior of 
many other states in order to calculate the balance of power between coalitions. Even assuming 
that a state knows who is goi ng to fight with and against it, measuring the military strength of 
multistate coalitions is considerably more difficult than assessing the power of a sin gle rival. 
Miscalculation is less likely in a bipolar world. States are less likely to miscalculate others' 
resolve, because the rules of the road with the main opponent become settled over time, 
leading both parties to recognize the limits beyond which they cannot push the other. States 
also cannot mis calculate the membership of the opposing coalition, since each side faces only 
one main enemy. Simplicity breeds certainty; certainty bolsters peace. 
 
Balanced vs. Unbalanced Multipolarity 
 
Unbalanced multipolar systems are especially war -prone for two rea sons. The potential 
hegemons, which are the defining feature of this kind of system, have an appreciable power 
advantage over the other great powers, which means that they have good prospects of winning 
wars against their weaker rivals. One might think that a marked power asym metry of this sort 
would decrease the prospects for war. After all, being so powerful should make the potential 
hegemon feel secure and thus should ameliorate the need to initiate a war to gain more power. Moreover, the lesser powers should recognize that the leading state is essentially a status quo 
power and relax. But even if they fail to recognize the dominant power's benign intentions, the 
fact is that they do not have the military capability to challenge it. - Therefore, according to this 
logic, the presence of a potential hegemon in a multipolar system should enhance the prospects 
for peace. 
This is not what happens, however, when potential hegemons come on the scene. Their 
considerable military might notwithstanding, they are not likely to be satisfied with the balance of 
power. Instead they will aim to acquire more power and eventually gain regional hegemony, 
because hegemony is the ultimate form of security; there are no meaningful secu rity threats to 
the dominant power in a unipolar system. Of course, not only do potent ial hegemons have a 
powerful incentive to rule their region, they also have the capability to push for supremacy, 
which means that they are a dangerous threat to peace. 
Potential hegemons also invite war by increasing the level of fear among the great powers.
13 
Fear is endemic to states in the international system, and it drives them to compete for power so that they can increase their prospects for survival in a dangerous world. The emergence of a 
potential hegemon, however, makes the other great powers es pecially fearful, and they will 
search hard for ways to correct the imbalance of power and will be inclined to pursue riskier 
policies toward that end. The reason is simple: when one state is threatening to dominate the 
rest, the long -term value of remaini ng at peace declines and threatened states will be more 
willing to take chances to improve their security. 
A potential hegemon does not have to do much to generate fear among the other states in 
the system. Its formidable capabilities alone are likely to scare neighboring great powers and 
push at least some of them to create a balancing coalition against their dangerous opponent. 
Because a state's intentions are difficult to discern, and because they can change quickly, rival 
great powers will be inclined to assume the worst about the potential hegemon's intentions, 
further reinforcing the threatened states' inc entive to contain it and maybe even weaken it if the 
opportunity pres ents itself. 
The target of this containment strategy, however, is sure to view any balancing coalition 
forming against it as encirclement by its rivals. The poten tial hegemon would be c orrect to think 
this way, even though the lesser great powers' purpose is essentially defensive in nature. 
Nevertheless, the leading state is likely to feel threatened and scared and consequently is like ly 
to take steps to enhance its security, thereby .m aking the neighboring great powers more 
scared, and forcing them to take additional steps to enhance their security, which then scares the potential hegemon even more, and so on. In short, potential hegemons generate spirals of 
fear that are hard to control. This problem is compounded by the fact that they pos sess 
considerable power and thus are likely to think they can solve their security problems by going to war. 
 Summary 
 Thus, bipolarity is the most stable of the different architectures, for four reas ons. First, there 
are relatively fewer opportunities for conflict in bipolarity, and only one possible conflict dyad 
involving the great powers. When great powers do fight in bipolarity, they are likely to engage 
minor powers, not the rival great power. S econd, power is more likely to be equally distributed 
among the 'great powers in bipolarity, an important structural source of stability. Furthermore, there is limited opportunity for the great powers to gang up against other states or take 
advantage of mi nor powers. Third, bipolarity discourages miscalculation and 'thus reduces the 
likelihood that the great powers will stumble into war. Fourth, although fear is constantly at play 
in world politics, bipolarity does not magnify those anxieties that haunt states. 
Balanced multipolarity is more prone to war than is bipolarity, for three reasons. First, 
multipolarity presents considerably more opportuni ties for conflict, especially between the great 
powers themselves. Wars that simultaneously involve all the great powers, however, are 
unlikely. Second, power is likely to be distributed unevenly among the leading states, and those 
states with greater military capability will be prone to start wars, because they will think that they 
.have the capability to win them. There will also be ample opportunity for great powers to gang 
up on third parties and to coerce or conquer minor powers. Third, miscalcu lation is likely to be a 
serious problem in balanced multipolarity, although high levels of fear among the great powers 
are unlikely, because there are no exceptional power gaps between the leading states in the 
system. 
Unbalanced multipolarity is the most perilous distribution of power. Not only does it have all 
the problems of balanced multipolarity, it also suffers from the worst kind of inequality: t he 
presence of a potential hege mon. That state both has significant capability to cause trouble and 
spawns high levels of fear among the great powers. Both of those developments increase the 
likelihood of war, which is likely to involve all the great powers in the system and be especially 
costly. 
Now that the theory about the causes of war has been presented, let us switch gears and 
consider how well it explains events in Europe between 1792 and 1990. 
 
Great -Power War in Modern Europe, 1792 -1990 
 
To test offensive realism's claims about how different distributions of power affect the 
likelihood of great -power war, it is necessary to identify the periods between 1792 and 1990 
when Europe was either bipolar or multipolar, and when there was a potential hegemon in those 
multipolar systems. It is then necessary to identify the great -power wars for each of those 
periods. 
System structure, we know, is a function of the number of great powers and how power is 
apportioned among t hem. The list of European great powers for the two centuries under 
discussion includes Austria, Great Britain, Germany, Italy, and Russia.14 Only Russia, which 
was known as the Soviet Union between 1917 and 1990, was a great power for the entire 
period. Austria, which became Austria -Hungary in 1867, was a great power from 1792 until its 
demise in 1918. Great Britain and Germany were great powers from 1792 until 1945, although 
Germany was actually Prussia before 1871. Italy is considered a great power from 1861 until its 
collapse in 1943. 
What about Japan and the United States, which are not located in Europe, but were great 
powers for part of the relevant period? Japan, which was a great power from 1895 until 1945, is 
left out of the subse quent analysis bec ause it was never a major player in European politics. 
Japan declared war against Germany at the start of World War I, but other than taking a few 
German possessions in Asia, it remained on the si delines. Japan also sent troops into the 
Soviet Union during the last year of World War I, in conjunction with the United Kingdom, 
France, and the United States, who were trying to get the Soviet Union back into the war 
against Germany.15 Japan, however, was mainly concerned with acquiring territory in Russia's 
Far East, not with events in Europe, about which it cared little. Regardless, the intervention was 
a failure. 
The United States is a different matter. Although it is located in the Western Hemisphere, it 
committed military forces to fight in Europe dur ing both world wars, and it has maintained a 
large military presence in the region since 1945. In those instances in which the United States 
accepted a continental commitment, it is considered a major actor in the European balance of 
power. But for reasons discussed in Chapter 7, America was never a potential hegemon in Europe; it acted instead as an offshore balancer. Much of the work on assessing the relative 
strength of the great powers during the years between 1792 and 1990, especially regarding the 
crucial q uestion of whether there was a potential hegemon in Europe, was done in Chapter 8. 
The missing parts of the story are filled in below. 
Based on the relevant distribution of power among the major states, European history from 
the outbreak of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars in 1792 until the end of the Cold 
War in 1990 can be roughly divided into seven periods: 
 1) Napoleonic era I, 1792- 93 (1 year), balanced multipolarity; 
2) Napoleonic era II, 1793- 1815 (22 years), unbalanced multipolarity; 
3) Nineteenth century, 1815- 1902 (88 years), balanced multipolarity; 
4) Kaiserreich era, 1903- 18 (16 years), unbalanced multipolarity; 
5) Interwar years, 1919 -38 (20 years), balanced multipolarity; 
6) Nazi era, 1939- 45 (6 years), unbalanced multipolarity; and 
7) Cold War, 1945 -90 (46 years), bipolarity. 
 
The list of wars for each of these seven periods is drawn from Jack Levy's well -regarded 
database of great -power wars.
16 However, one minor adjustment was made to that database: I 
treat the Russo -Polish War (1919- 20) and the Russian Civil War (1918- 21) as separate 
conflicts, whereas Levy treats them as part of the same war. Only wars that involved at least 
one European great power and were fought between European states are included in this 
analysis. Wars inv olving a European great power and a non -European state are excluded. Thus 
the War of 1812 between the United Kingdom and the United States, the Russo- Japanese War 
(1904- 5), and the Soviet war in Afghanistan (1979 -89) are omitted.17 Also excluded are 
European wars involving only minor powers. Finally, civil wars are not included in the analysis, 
unless there was sub stantial outside intervention by at least one European state, as there was 
in the Russian Civil War. The Spanish Civil War (1936- 39) is omitted, although it is a close call. 
Great -power wars are broken down into three categories. "Central wars" involve virtually all 
of the great powers in the system, and the com batants fight with tremendous intensity.18 "Great 
power vs. great power wars" involve either one -on-one or two- on-one fights. It should be noted 
that there is no difference between a central war and a great power vs. great power war in either 
a bipolar system or a multipolar system with three great powers. No such cases exist, however, 
in modern E uropean his tory. Finally, there are "great power vs. minor power wars." During the 
199-year period of European history under study, there were a total of 24 great -power wars, 
including 3 central wars, 6 great power vs. great power wars, and 15 grea t power vs. minor 
power wars. 
 
The Napoleonic Era, 1792- 1815 
 
Europe was home to five great powers between 1792 and 1815: Austria, Britain/United 
Kingdom, France, Prussia, and Russia. Although France was clearly the most powerful state during this period, it was not a potential hegemon until the early fall of 1793, because it did not 
have the most for midable army in Europe before then.
19 Remember that Austria and Prussia 
went to war against France in 1792 because it was militarily weak and therefore was considered vulnerable to invasion. France retained its exalt ed status as a potential hegemon until Napoleon 
was finally defeated in the spring of 1815. Thus, there was balanced multipolarity in Europe 
from 1792 until 1793, and unbalanced multipolarity from 1793 until 1815. 
The period from 1792 to 1815 was dominated by the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic 
Wars. The first year of that conflict is categorized as a great power vs. great power war, 
because it involved only three great powers: Austria, France, and Prussia. Great Britain and 
Russia sat on the sidelines throughout 1792 and early 1793. The remaining twenty -two years of 
that conflict are categorized as a central war. France, which was attempting to become Europe's 
hegemon, fought against Austria, Br itain, Prussia, and Russia — although in different 
combinations at different times. 
There were also three great power vs. minor power wars in the Napoleonic era. The Russo -
Turkish War (1806- 12) was basically an attempt by Russia to take Bessarabia, Moldavi a, and 
Walachia away from Turkey, which was then called the Ottoman Empire. Russian victories in the last year of that war won Bessarabia, but not the other two regions. The Russo -Swedish 
War (1808- 9) was caused by French and Russian unhappiness over Sweden's alliance with the 
United Kingdom. Russia and Denmark went to war against Sweden and were victorious. 
Sweden had to surrender Finland and the Aland Islands to Russia. The Neapolitan War (1815) 
was fought between Austria and Naples. In the wake of Napoleon's departure from Italy, Austria 
was determined to reassert its preeminence in the region, while the Neapolitan forces were bent 
on pushing Austria out of Italy. Austria won the conflict. 
 
The Nineteenth Century, 1815- 1902 
 
Six great powers populated the European system for this eighty -eight -year period between 
the final defeat of Napoleonic France and the rise of Wilhelmine Germany. Austria/Austria-Hungary, the United Kingdom, France, Prussia/Germany, and Russia were great powers for the 
entire period. I taly joined the club in 1861. There was no potential hegemon in Europe between 
1815 and 1902. The United Kingdom was clearly the wealthiest state in Europe during that 
period (see Table 3.3), but it never translated its abundant wealth into military might. In fact, the 
United Kingdom maintained a small and weak army for most of the period in question. The 
largest armies in Europe between 1815 and 1860 belonged to Austria, France, and Russia, but 
none of them possessed an army that was powerful enough to overrun Europe (see Tables 9.1 
and 9.2).
20 Nor did any of them come close to having enough latent power to qualify as a 
potential hegemon. 
The Prussian army became a formidable fighting force in the 1860s, vying with the Austrian 
and French armies for the num ber one ranking in Europe.21 France occupied that position for 
the first half of the decade; Prussia held it for the second half. There is little doubt that Germany 
had the strongest army in Europe between 1870 and 1902, but it was not yet so powerful that it 
was a threat to the entire continent. Furthermore, Germany did not yet have sufficient wealth to qualify as a potential hegemon. Thus, it seems fair to say that there was balanced multipolarity in Europe during the nineteenth century. 
There were four great power vs. great power wars between 1815 and 1902. The Crimean 
War (1853- 56) was initially a war between Russia and the Ottoman Empire, with the former 
trying to make territorial gains at the expense of the latter. But the United Kingdom and France entered the war on the Ottoman Empire's side. Russia was defeated and was forced to make minor territorial concessions. In the War of Italian Unification (1859), France joined forces with 
Piedmont to drive Austria out of Italy and create a unified Italian st ate. Austria lost the war and 
Italy came into being shortly thereafter. In the Austro -Prussian War (1866), Prussia and Italy 
were arrayed against Austria. Prussia and Austria were essentially fighting to determine which one of them would dominate a unified Germany, while Italy was bent on taking territory from 
Austria. Austria lost and Prussia made substantial territorial gains at Austria's expense. But 
German unification was still not completed. The Franco- Prussian War (1870- 71) was ostensibly 
fought over Prussian interference in Spain's politics. In fact, Bismarck wanted the war so he 
could complete German unification, while France wanted territorial compensation to offset 
Prussia's gains in 1866. The Prussian army won a decisive victory. 
There were also eight great power vs. minor power wars during the nineteenth century. The 
Franco- Spanish War (1823) stemmed from a revolt in Spain that removed the reigning king from 
his throne. France inter vened to restore peace and the monarchy. Navarino Bay (1827) was a 
brief naval engagement with the United Kingdom, France, and Russia on one side and the Ottoman Empire and Egypt on the other. The great powers were helping the Greeks gain their 
independence from the Ottoman Empire. In the Russo -Turkish War (1828- 29), the Russians 
went to war against the Ottoman Empire to support Greek independence and to make territorial 
gains in the Caucasus and other places at the Ottoman Empire's expense. The First Schleswig -
Holstein War (1848^9) was an unsuccessful effort by Prussia to take the duchies of Schleswig 
and Holstein away from Denmark and make them a German state. 
In the Austro -Sardinian War (1848), the kingdom of Piedmont -Sardinia sought to drive 
Austria out of Italy and create a unified Italy under its own auspices. This attempt at liberation 
failed. The Roman Republic War (1849) broke out when France sent an army to Rome to 
restore the pope to power and crush the fledgling republic established there by Giuseppe 
Mazzini. In the Second Schleswig- Holstein War (1864), Austria and Prussia ganged up to finally 
take those disputed duchies away from Denmark. Finally, in the Russo -Turkish War (1877- 78), 
Russia and Serbia sided with Bosnia- Herzegovina and Bulgaria in their effort to gain 
independence from the Ottoman Empire. 
 
The Kaiserreich Era, 1903- 18 
 
There was no change in the lineup of great powers after 1903. The same six great powers 
remained at the center of European politics, save for the fact that the United States became a major player in 1918, when American troops began arriving on the continent in large numbers. 
Wilhelmine Germany, as emphasized in Chapter 8, was a potential hege -mon during this period; 
it controlled the mightiest army and the greatest amount of wealth in the region. Thus, there was unbalanced multipolar ity in Europe from 1903 to 1918. 
This period was dominated by World War I (1914 —18), a central war involving all of the 
great powers and many of the minor powers in Europe. There was also one great power vs. great power war during this period. In the Russian Civil War (1918 -21), the United Kingdom, 
France, Japan, and the United States sent troops into the Soviet Union in the midst of its civil 
war. They ended up fighting some brief but intense battles against the Bolsheviks, who 
nevertheless survived. Finally, there was one great power vs. minor power conflict during this 
period: the Italo -Turkish War (1911- 12). Italy, which was bent on establishing an empire in the 
area around the Mediterranean Sea, invaded and conquered Tripolitania and Cyrenaica in N orth 
Africa, which were then provinces in the Ottoman Empire (both are part of Libya today). 
 
The Interwar Years, 1919- 38 
 There were five great powers in the European system between the two world wars. Austria-
Hungary disappeared at the close of World War I, but the United Kingdom, France, Germany, 
Italy, and the Soviet Union remained intact. There was no potential hegemon in Europe during these two decades. The United Kingdom was the wealthiest state in Europe dur ing the first few 
years after the war, but Germany regained the lead by the late 1920s (see Table 3.3). Neither the United Kingdom nor Germany, however, had the most powerful army in the region between 
1919 and 1938.
22 Indeed, both states possessed especially weak armies throughout the 1920s 
and early 1930s. The German arm y certainly grew more power ful during the late 1930s, but it 
did not become the strongest army in Europe until 1939. Although it might seem difficult to believe given France's catastrophic defeat in 1940, France possessed the number one army in 
Europe during the interwar years. But France had nowhere near the wealth and population to be 
a potential hegemon. Thus, there was balanced multipolarity in Europe during this period. 
There were no great power vs. great power wars between 1919 and 1938, but there was 
one war between a great power and a minor power. In the Russo -Polish War (1919- 20), Poland 
invaded a badly weakened Soviet Union in the wake of World War I, hoping to detach 
Belorussia and Ukraine from the Soviet Union and make them part of a Polish- led federa tion. 
Although Poland failed to achieve that goal, it did acquire some terri tory in Belorussia and 
Ukraine. 
 The Nazi Era, 1939- 45 
 This period began with the same five great powers that dominated the interwar years. But 
France was knocked out of the ranks of the great powers in the spring of 1940, and Italy went the same route in 1943. The United Kingdom, Germany, and the Soviet Union remained great 
powers until 1945. Also, the United States became deeply involved in European politics after it 
entered World War II in December 1941. As discussed in Chapter 8, Nazi Germany was a 
potential hegemon from 1939 until it col lapsed in defeat in the spring of 1945. Thus, there was 
unbalanced multi -polarity in Europe during this per iod. 
World War II (1939- 45), which was a central war, was obviously the dominating event in 
Europe during this period. There was also one great power vs. minor power war: the Russo -
Finmsh War (1939- 40). In anticipa tion of a possible Nazi attack on the Sov iet Union, Stalin had 
demanded territorial concessions from Finland in the fall of 1939. The Finns refused and the 
Red Army invaded Finland in late November 1939. Finland capit ulated in March 1940 and the 
Soviet Union took the territory it wanted. 
 
The Cold War, 1945 -90 
 
There was only one great power left in Europe after World War II: the Soviet Union.
23 The 
United States, however, was determined to prevent the Soviets from dominating the region, so 
they maintained a massive military presence in Europe throughout the Cold War. This was the 
first time in its history that the United States stationed large numbers of troops in Europe during peacetime. Europe was therefore bipolar from 1945 to 1990. 
There was no war between the two great powers during this per iod, but there was one great 
power vs. minor power war. In the Russo - Hungarian War (1956), the Soviet Union successfully 
intervened to put down an anticommunist revolt in Hungary. 
 
Analysis 
 
Let us now sort this information to see how much great -power war there was in Europe 
when it was characterized by bipolarity, by bal anced multipolarity, and by unbalanced 
multipolarity. In particular, let us consider the number of wars, the frequency of war, and the 
deadliness of the wars in each of those kinds of sys tems. The number of great -power wars in 
each period is broken down according to the three types of war described earlier: central, great 
power vs. great power, and great power vs. minor power. Frequency is determined by adding up 
the years in each period i n which a great -power war was being fought. War need only be fought 
in some part of a year for that year to be counted as a war year. For example, the Crimean War ran from October 1853 until February 1856, and thus 1853, 1854, 1855, and 1856 are counted 
as war years. Finally, deadliness is measured by counting the number of military deaths in each 
conflict; civilian deaths are omitted. 
Bipolarity seems to be the most peaceful and least deadly kind of archi tecture (see Table 
9.3). Between 1945 and 1990, whi ch was the only peri od during which Europe was bipolar, 
there was no war between the great powers. There was, however, one great power vs. minor power war, which lasted less than a month. Thus war took place in Europe during only one of 
the 46 years in which it was bipolar. Regarding deadliness, there were 10,000 deaths in that 
conflict. 
Unbalanced multipolarity is by far the most war -prone and deadly dis tribution of power. 
During the periods when there was a potential hege mon in a multipolar Europe—1793- 1815, 
1903- 18/1939 -45— there were three central wars, one great power vs. great power war, and five 
great power vs. minor power wars. A war was being fought during 35 of the relevant 44 years, and in 11 of those years two wars were going on at the same time . Finally, there were roughly 
27 million military deaths in those conflicts (and probably about as many civilian deaths when all 
the murder and mayhem in World War II is taken into account). 
Balanced multipolarity falls somewhere in between the other two k inds of systems. Consider 
that there were no hegemonic wars, five great power vs. great power wars, and nine great power vs. minor power wars during the times when Europe was multipol ar but without a 
potential hege mon—1792- 93, 1815- 1902, 1919 -38. In terms of frequency, war took place 
somewhere in Europe during 20 of the relevant 109 years. Thus, war was going on 18.3 percent of the time in balanced multipolarity, com pared with 2.2 percent in bipolarity and 79.5 percent in 
unbalanced mul tipolarity. Regardi ng deadliness, there were approximately 1.2 million military 
deaths in the various wars fought in balanced multipolarity, which is far less than the 27 million 
in unbalanced multipolarity, but sub stantially more than the 10,000 in bipolarity. 
 Conclusion 
 
These results appear to offer strong confirmation of offensive realism. Nevertheless, an 
important caveat is in order. Nuclear weapons, which were first deployed in 1945, were present for the entire time that Europe was bipolar, but they were not present in any of the previous 
multipolar sys tems. This creates a problem for my argument, because nuclear weapons are a 
powerful force for peace, and they surely help account for the -absence of great -power war in 
Europe between 1945 and 1990. It is impossible, how ever, to determine the relative influence of 
bipolarity and nuclear weapons in producing this long period of stability. 
It would be helpful in dealing with this problem if we could turn to some empirical studies 
that provide reliable evidence on the eff ects of bipolarity and multipolarity on the likelihood of 
war in the absence of nuclear weapons. But there are none. From its beginning until 1945 the 
European state system was multipolar, leaving this history barren of com parisons that would 
reveal the differing effects of multipolarity and bipolarity. Earlier history does afford some apparent examples of bipolar systems, including some that were warlike —Athens and Sparta, 
Rome and Carthage —but this history is inconclusive because it is incomplete. 
This problem does not arise, however, when comparing the two kinds of multipolarity, 
because there were no nuclear weapons before 1945. It is apparent from the analysis that 
whether a multipolar system contains a potential hegemon like Napoleonic France, Wilhel mine 
Germany, or Na/i Germany has a profound influence on the prospects for peace. Any time a multipolar system contains a power that has the strongest army as well as the greatest amount 
of wealth, deadly war among the great powers is more likely. 
Little has been said up to this point about international politics after the Cold War. The next 
and final chapter will consider relations among the great powers in the 1990s, as well as the likelihood of great -power conflict in the century ahead. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Ten 
Great Power Politics in the Twenty -First Century 
 
A large body of opinion holds that international politics underwent a fundamental 
transformation with the end of the Cold War. Cooperation, not security competition and con flict, 
is now the defining feature of relations among the great powers. Not surprisingly, the optimists 
who hold this view claim that realism no longer has much explanatory power. It is old thinking 
and is largely irrelevant to the new realities of world politics. Realists have gone the way of the 
dinosaurs; they just don't realize it. The best that might be said about the ories such as offensive 
realism is that they are helpful for understanding how great powers interacted before 1990, but they are useless now and for the foreseeable future. Therefore, we need new theories to 
compre hend the world around us. 
President Bill Clinton articulated this perspective throughout the 1990s. For example, he 
declared in 1992 that, "in a world where freedom, not tyranny , is on the march, the cynical 
calculus of pure power politics simply does not compute. It is ill -suited to a new era." Five years 
later he sounded the same theme when defending the expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) to include some of the formerly communist Warsaw Pact states. Clinton 
argued that the charge that this expansion policy might isolate Russia was based on the belief 
"that the great power territorial politics of the 20th century will dominate the 21st century," which 
he rejected. Instead, he emphasized his belief that "enlightened self -interest, as well as shared 
values, will compel countries to define their greatness in more constructive ways . . . and will 
compel us to cooperate in more constructive ways."
1 
The optimists ' claim that security competition and war among the great powers has been 
burned out of the system is wrong. In fact, all of the major states around the globe still care 
deeply about the balance of power and are destined to compete for power among themselv es 
for the foresee able future. Consequently, realism will offer the most powerful explanations of 
international politics over the next century, and this will be true even if the debates among 
academic and policy elites are dominated by non -realist theori es. In short, the real world 
remains a realist world. 
States still fear each other and seek to gain power at each other's expense, because 
international anarchy —the driving force behind great -power behavior —did not change with the 
end of the Cold War, and there are few signs that such change is likely any time soon. States remain the principal actors in world politics and there is still no night watchman standing above 
them. For sure, the collapse of the Soviet Union caused a major shift in the global distr ibution of 
power. But it did not give rise to a change in the anarchic structure of the system, and without that kind of profound change, there is no reason to expect the great powers to behave much 
differently in the new century than they did in previous centuries. 
Indeed, considerable evidence from the 1990s indicates that power pol itics has not 
disappeared from Europe and Northeast Asia, the regions in which there are two or more great 
powers, as well as possible great pow ers such as Germany and Japan. There is no question, 
however, that the competition for power over the past decade has been low -key. Still, there is 
potential for intense security competi tion among the great powers that might lead to a major 
war. Probably the best evidence of that possi bility is the fact that the United States maintains 
about one hundred thousand troops each in Europe and in Northeast Asia for the explicit 
purpose of keeping the major states in each region at peace. 
These relatively peaceful circumstances are largely the result of benign distributions of 
power in each region. Europe remains bipolar (Russia and the United States are the major powers), which is the most stable kind of power structure. Northeast Asia is multipolar (China, 
Russia, and the United States), a configuration more prone to instability; but fortunately there is 
no potential hegemon in that system. Furthermore, stability is enhanced in both regions by 
nuclear weapons, the continued presence of U.S. forces, and the relative weakness of China 
and Russia. These power structures in Europe and Northeast Asia are likely to change over the 
next two decades, however, leading to intensified security competition and possibly war among 
the great powers. 
The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. In the next sec tion, I analyze the 
claims that international politics has changed or is about to change in essential ways, thus 
undermining realism. Because of space limitations, it is impossible to deal with each argument in detail. Nevertheless, it should be apparent from my analysis that the basic struc ture of the 
international system did not change with the end of the Cold War, and that there is little reason to think that change is in the offing. I attempt to show in the following section the considerable 
evidence from the decade 1991- 2000 that security competition among the great powers is not 
obsolete, either in Europe or in Northeast Asia: In the subsequent four sections, I make the case 
that we are likely to see greater instability in those important r egions over the next twenty years. 
Finally, in a brief conclusion, I argue that a rising China is the most dangerous potential threat to the United States in the early twenty -first century. 
 
Persistent Anarchy 
 
The structure of the international system, as emphasized in Chapter 2, is defined by five 
assumptions about how the world is organized that have some basis in fact: 1) states are the 
key actors in world politics and they operate in an anarchic system, 2) great powers invariably 
have some offensive mi litary capability, 3) states can never be certain whether other states 
have hostile intentions toward them, 4) great powers place a high premium on survival, and 5) 
states are rational actors who are reasonably effective at designing strategies that maximi ze 
their chances of survival. 
These features of the international system appear to be intact as we begin the twenty -first 
century. The world still comprises states that oper ate in an anarchic setting. Neither the United 
Nations nor any other inter national institution has much coercive leverage over the great 
powers. Furthermore, virtually every state has at least some offensive military capability, and 
there is little evidence that world disarmament is in sight. On the contrary, the world arms trade 
is flourishing, and nuclear prolifer ation, not abolition, is likely to concern tomorrow's 
policymakers. In addi tion, great powers have yet to discover a way to divine each other's 
intentions. For example, nobody can predict with any degree of certainty what C hinese or 
German foreign policy goals will be in 2020. Moreover, there is no good evidence that survival is 
a less important goal for states today than it was before 1990. Nor is there much reason to 
believe that the ability of great powers to think strate gically has declined since the Cold War 
ended. 
This description of continuity in great -power politics has been chal lenged on a variety of 
fronts by experts who believe that significant changes have recently occurred in the structure of 
the international s ystem —changes that portend a welcome peace among the great powers. 
Although there are sharp differences among these optimists about the root causes of this 
purported transformation, each argument is essentially a direct challenge to one of the realist 
assumptions described above. The only claim that the optimists do not challenge is the claim 
that states are rational actors. Instead, they concentrate their fire on the other four real ist beliefs 
about the international system. Let us consider, in turn, their best arguments against each of 
those core assumptions. 
 
Sovereignty at Bay 
 
Some suggest that international institutions are growing in number and in their ability to 
push states to cooperate with each other.
2 Specifically, institutions can dampen security 
competition and promote world peace because they have the capability to get states to reject 
power -maximizing behavior and to refrain from calculating each important move according to 
how it affects their position in the balance of power. Institutions, so the argument goes, have an 
independent effect on state behavior that at least mitigates and possibly might put an end to 
anarchy. 
The rhetoric about the growing strength of international institutions notwithstanding, there is 
little evidence that they can get great powers to act contrary to the dictates of realism.3 I know of 
no study that provides evidence to support that claim. The United Nations is the only worldwide 
organization with any hope of wielding such power, but it could not even shut down the war in 
Bosnia between 1992 and 1995, much less push a great power around. Moreover, what little 
influence the United Nations (UN) holds over states is likely to wane even further in the new 
century, because its key decision- making body, the Security Council, is sure to grow in size. 
Creating a larger council, especially one with more perma nent members who have a veto over 
UN policy, would make it virtually impossible to formulate and enforce policies designed to limit 
the actions of the great powers. 
There is no institution with any real power in Asia. Although there are a handful of 
impressive institutions in Europe, such" as. NATO and the European Union, there is little 
evidence that they can compel member states to act against t heir strategic interests. What is 
most impressive about international institutions is how little independent effect they seem to 
have on great -power behavior. 
Of course, states sometimes operate through institutions and benefit from doing so. 
However, the most powerful states in the system create and shape institutions so that they can 
maintain, if not increase, their own share of world power. Institutions are essentially "arenas for 
acting out power relationships."4 When the United States decided it did no t want Secretary -
General Boutros Boutros -Ghali to head the UN for a second term, it forced him out, despite the 
fact that all the other members of the Security Council wanted him to stay on the job. The United 
States is the most powerful state in the world, and it usually gets its way on issues it judges 
important. If it does not, it ignores the institution and does what it deems to be in its own national interest. 
Others argue that the state is being rendered impotent by globalization or by today's 
unprecedented levels of economic interdependence. In par ticular, great powers are said to be 
incapable of dealing with the mighty forces unleashed by global capitalism and are becoming 
marginal players in world politics.
5 "Where states were once the masters of m arkets, now it is 
the markets which, on many crucial issues, are the masters over the governments of states."6 
For some, the key actor in the market is the multinational corporation (MNC), which is seen as 
threatening to over whelm the state.7 
The fact is that the levels of economic transactions among states today, when compared 
with domestic economic dealings, are probably no greater than they were in the early twentieth 
century.8 The international economy has been buffeting states for centuries, and they have 
proved remarkably resilient in the face of that pressure. Contemporary states are no exception 
in this regard; they are not being overwhelmed by market forces or MNCs but are making the 
adjustments necessary to ensure their survival.9 
Another reason t o doubt these claims about the state's impending demise is that there is no 
plausible alternative on the horizon. If the state disappears, presumably some new political 
entity would have to take its place, but it seems that nobody has identified that replacement. 
Even if the state disappeared, however, that would not necessarily mean the end of security 
competition and war. After all, Thucydides and Machiavelli wrote long before the birth of the 
state system. Realism merely requires anarchy; it does not mat ter what kind of political units 
make up the system. They could be states, city -states, cults, empires, tribes, gangs, feudal 
principali ties, or whatever. Rhetoric aside, we are not moving toward a hierarchic international 
system, which would effectively mean some kind of world government. In fact, anarchy looks like it will be with us for a long time. 
Finally, there is good reason to think that the state has a bright future. Nationalism is 
probably the most powerful political ideology in the world, and it glorifies the state.10 Indeed, it is 
apparent that a large number of nations around the world want their own state, or rather nation-
state, and they seem to have little interest in any alternative political arrange ment. Consider, for 
example, how badly t he Palestinians want their own state, and before 1948, how desperately 
the Jews wanted their own state. Now that the Jews have Israel it is unthinkable that they would 
give it up. If the Palestinians get their own state, they surely will go to great lengths to ensure its 
survival. 
The usual rejoinder to this perspective is to argue that the recent histo ry of the European 
Union contradicts it. The states of western Europe have largely abandoned nationalism and are 
well on their way toward achiev ing politic al unity, providing powerful evidence that the state 
system's days are numbered. Although the members of the European Union have cer tainly 
achieved substantial economic integration, there is little evidence that this path will lead to the 
creation of a superstate. In fact, both nation alism and the existing states in western Europe 
appear to be alive and well. Consider French thinking on the matter, as reflected in the 
comments of French president Jacques Chirac to the German Bundestag in June 2000: he sai d 
that he envisioned a "united Europe of states rather than a United States of Europe."11 He went 
on to say, "Neither you nor we envisage the creation of a European superstate that would take 
the place of our nation states and end their role as actors on t he international stage. ... In the 
future, our nations will stay the first reference point for our people." But even if Chirac proves wrong and western Europe becomes a superstate, it would still be a state, albeit a powerful one, 
operating in a system of states. 
Nothing is forever, but there is no good reason to think that the sover eign state's time has 
passed. 
 
The Futility of Offense 
 
Some suggest that great powers no longer have a meaningful offensive military capability 
against each other, because great -power war has become prohibitively costly. In essence, war 
is no longer a useful instrument of statecraft. John Mueller maintains that offense had become 
too costly for rational leaders even before the advent of nuclear weapons.
12 World War I was 
decisive proof, he argues, that conventional war among the great powers had degenerated to 
the point where it was essentially senseless slaughter. The main flaw in this line of argument is 
that great -power conventional wars do not have to be protracted and bloody affairs. Quick and 
decisive victories are possible, as Germany demonstrated against France in 1940—which means that great powers can still have a viable offensive capability against one another. 
The more persuasive variant of this argument is that nuclear weapons make it almost 
impossible for great powers to attack each other. After all, it is difficult to imagine winning any 
kind of meaningful victory in an all -out nuclear war. This argument, too, falls apart on close 
inspection. There is no question that nuclear weapons significantly reduce the likelihood of 
great -power war, but as discussed in Chapter 4, war between nuclear -armed great powers is 
still a serious possibility. Remember that during the Cold War, the United States and its NATO 
allies wer e deeply worried about a Soviet conventional attack into Western Europe, and after 
1979 about a Soviet invasion of Iran. The fact that both superpowers had mas sive nuclear 
arsenals apparently did not persuade either side that the other had no offensive mi litary 
capability. 
 Certain Intentions 
 Democratic peace theory is built on the premises that democracies can be more certain of 
each other's intentions and that those intentions are gen erally benign; thus they do not fight 
among themselves.13 If all the great powers were democracies, each could be certain that the 
others had friendly intentions, and thus they would have no need to compete for power or 
prepare for major war. Since democracy appears to be spreading across the globe, it is 
reasonable to think that the world will eventually become one giant zone of peace. 
As challenges to realism go, democratic peace theory is among the strongest. Still, it has 
serious problems that ultimately make it unconvinc ing. The theory's proponents maintain that 
the available evidence shows that democracies do not fight other democracies. But other 
scholars who have examined the historical record dispute this claim. Perhaps the most telling 
evidence against the theory is Christopher Layne's careful analysis of four crises in which rival democracies almost went to war with each other.
14 When one looks at how the decision not to 
fight was reached in each case, the fact that both sides were democracies appears to have 
mattered little. There certainly is no evidence that the rival democracies had benign intentions 
toward each other. In fact, the outcome each time was largely determined by balance- of-power 
considerations. 
Another reason to doubt democratic peace theory is the problem of backsliding. No 
democracy can be sure that another democracy will not someday become an authoritarian 
state, in which case the remaining democracy would no longer be safe and secure.15 Prudence 
dictates that democracies prepare for that eventuality, which means striving to have as much 
power as possible just in case a friendly neighbor turns into the neighborhood bully. But even if 
one rejects these criticisms and embraces democratic peace theory, it is still unlikely that all the 
great powers, in the system will become democratic and stay that way over the long term. It 
would only take a non -democratic China or Russia to keep power politics in play, and both of 
those states are likely to be non- democratic for at least part of the twenty -first century.16 
Social constructivists provide another perspective on how to create a world of states with 
benign intentions that are readily recognizable by other states.17 They maintain that the way 
states behave toward each other is not a function of how the material world is structured —as 
realists argue —but instead is largely determined by how individuals think and talk about 
international politics. This perspective is nicely captured by Alexander Wendt's famous claim 
that "anarchy is what states make of it."18 Discourse, in short, is the motor that drives 
international politics. But unfortunately, say social constructivists, realism has been the dominant discourse for at least the past seven centuries, and realism tells states to distrust 
other states and to take advantage of them whenever possible. What is needed to create a 
more peaceful world is a replacement discourse that emphasizes trust and cooperation among 
states, rather than suspicion and hostility. 
One reason to doubt this perspective is the simple fact that realism has dominated the 
international relations discourse for the past seven centuries or more. Such remarkable staying 
power over a lengthy period that has seen profound change in almost every other aspect of 
daily life strongly suggests that the basic structure of the international system —which has 
remained anarchic over that entire period—largely determines how states think and act toward 
each other. But even if we reject my materialist interpretation, what is going to cause the 
reigning discourse about world politics to change? Wha t is the causal mechanism that will 
delegitimize realism after seven hundred years and put a better substitute in its place? What 
determines whether the replacement discourse will be benign or malign? What guar antee is 
there that realism will not rise fro m the dead and once again become the hegemonic discourse? 
The social constructivists provide no answers to these important questions, which makes it hard 
to believe that a marked change in our discourse about international politics is in the offing.
19 
Social constructivists sometimes argue that the end of the Cold War represents a significant 
triumph for their perspective and is evidence of a more promising future.20 In particular, they 
maintain that in the 1980s a group of influential and dovish Western intellectuals convinced 
Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev to eschew realist thinking and instead work to foster 
peaceful relations with the United States and his neighbors in Europe. The result was Soviet 
withdrawal from Eastern Europe and the end of the Cold War, a Soviet Union with an 
enlightened foreign policy, and fundamental change in the norms that underpin great -power 
politics. 
Although Gorbachev surely played the key role in ending the Cold War, there are good 
reasons to doubt that his actions fundam entally trans formed international politics. As discussed 
in Chapter 6, his decis ion to liq uidate the Soviet empire in Eastern Europe can be explained by 
realism. By the mid- 1980s, it was clear that the Soviet Union was losing the Cold War and that it 
had little hope of catching up with the United States, which was in the midst of a massive arms 
buildup. In particular, the Soviet Union was suffering an economic and political crisis at home 
that made the costs of empire prohibitive and created powerful incentives to cooperate with the 
West to gain access to its technology. 
Many empires collapsed and many states broke apart before 1989, and many of them 
sought to give dire necessity the appearance of virtue. But the basic nature of international politics rema ined unchanged. That pat tern certainly appears to be holding up in the wake of the 
collapse of the Soviet Union. Consider that Gorbachev has been out of office and without much influence in Russia since the early 1990s, and there is little evidence that h is "new thinking" 
about international politics carries much weight inside Russia today.
21 In fact, contemporary 
Russian leaders view the world largely in terms of power politics, as discussed below. 
Moreover, Western leaders, as well as Russia's neighbors in eastern Europe, continue to fear 
that a resurgent Russia might be an expansionist state, which explains in part why NATO 
expanded eastward. In sum, it is not true that the collapse of the Soviet Union was 
unprecedented, that it violated realist concepti ons, or that it is a harbinger of a new, post -realist 
international system. 
 
Survival in the Global Commons 
 
Realist thinking about survival gets challenged in two ways. Proponents of globalization 
often argue that states today are concerned more with achieving prosperity than with worrying 
about their survival.22 Getting rich is the main goal of post -industrial states, maybe even the all -
consum ing goal. The basic logic here is that if all the great powers are prospering, none has any 
incentive to star t a war, because conflict in today's interde pendent world economy would 
redound to every state's disadvantage. Why torpedo a system that is making everyone rich? If 
war makes no sense, survival becomes a much less salient concern than realists would have 
you believe, and states can concentrate instead on accumulating wealth. 
There are problems with this perspective, too.23 In particular, there is always the possibility 
that a serious economic crisis in some important region, or in the world at large, will undermine 
the prosperity that this theory needs to work. For example, it is w idely believed that Asia's 
"economic miracle" worked to dampen security competition in that region before 1997, but that 
the 1997 -98 financial crisis in Asia helped foster a "new geopolitics."24 It is also worth noting that 
although the United States led a successful effort to contain that financial crisis, it was a close 
call, and there is no guarantee that the next crisis will not spread across the globe. But even in 
the absence of a major economic crisis, one or more states might not prosper; such a state 
would have little to lose economically, and maybe even something to gain, by starting a war. A 
key reason that Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in August 1990 was that Kuwait 
was exceeding its oil production quotas (set by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, or OPEC) and driving down Iraq's oil profits, which the Iraqi economy could ill -
afford.
25 
There are two other reasons to doubt the claim that econo mic interde pendence makes 
great -power war unlikely. States usually go to war against a single rival, and they aim to win a 
quick and decisive victory. Also, they invariably seek to discourage other states from joining with 
the other side in the fight. But a war against one or even two opponents is unlikely to do much 
damage to a state's economy, because typically only a tiny percentage of a state's wealth is tied 
up in economic intercourse with any other state. It is even possible, as discussed in Chapter 5, 
that con quest will produce significant economic benefits. 
Finally, an important historical case contradicts this perspective. As noted above, there was 
probably about as much economic interdepend ence in Europe between 1900 and 1914 as there 
is today. Those were also prosperous years for the European great powers. Yet World War I 
broke out in 1914. Thus a highly interdependent world economy does not make great -power war 
more or less likely. Great powers must be forever vigilant and never subordinate sur vival to any 
other goal, including prosperity. 
Another challenge to the realist perspective on survival emphasizes that the dangers states 
face today come not from the traditional kind of military threats that realists worry about, but 
instead from non -traditional threats such as AIDS, environmental degradation, unbounded 
population growth, and global warming.26 Problems of this magnitude, so the argu ment goes, 
can be solved only by the collective action of all the major states in the system. The selfish 
behavior associated with realism, on the other hand, will undermine efforts to neutralize these 
threats. States sure ly will recognize this fact and cooperate to find workable solutions. 
This perspective raises two problems. Although these dangers are a cause for concern, 
there is little evidence that any of them is serious enough to threaten the survival of a great 
power. The gravity of these threats may change over time, but for now they are at most second -
order problems.27 Furthermore, if any of these thr eats becomes deadly serious, it is not clear 
that the great powers would respond by acting collectively. For example, there may be cases 
where the relevant states cooperate to deal with a particular environmental problem, but an 
impressive literature dis cusses how such problems might also lead to inter -state war.28 
In sum, claims that the end of the Cold War ushered in sweeping changes in the structure of 
the international system are ultimately unper suasive. On the contrary, international anarchy 
remains f irmly intact, which means that there should not have been any significant changes in 
great -power behavior during the past decade. 
 Great-Power Behavior in the 1990s 
 The optimists' contention that international politics has undergone a great transformation 
applies mainly to relations among the great powers, who are no longer supposed to engage in 
security competition and fight wars with each other, or with minor powers in their region. 
Therefore, Europe and Northeast Asia, the areas that feature clusters of great powers, should 
be zones of peace, or what Karl Deutsch famously calls "pluralistic security communities."
29 
Optimists do not argue, however, that the threat of armed conflict has been eliminated from 
regions without great powers, such as 1) the Sout h Asian subcontinent, where India and 
Pakistan are bitter enemies armed with nuclear weapons and caught up in a raging dispute over Kashmir; 2) the Persian Gulf, where Iraq and Iran are bent on acquiring nuclear weapons and 
show no signs of becoming status quo powers; or 3) Africa, where seven different states are 
fighting a war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that some are calling "Africa's first world 
war."
30 Nor do opti mists claim that great powers no longer fight wars with states in these 
troubled regions; thus, the American- led war against Iraq in early 1991 is not evidence against 
their position. In short, great powers are not yet out of the war business altogether, only in 
Europe and Northeast Asia. 
There is no question that security com petition among the great powers in Europe and 
Northeast Asia has been subdued during the 1990s, and with the possible exception of the 1996 
dispute between China and the United States over Taiwan, there has been no hint of war 
between any of the great powers. Periods of relative peacefulness like this one, however, are 
not unprecedented in history. For example, there was little open con flict among the great 
powers in Europe from 1816 through 1852, or from 1871 through 1913. But this did not mean 
then, and it does not mean now, that the great powers stopped thinking and behaving according 
to realist logic. Indeed, there is substantial evidence that the major states in Europe and 
Northeast Asia still fear each other and continue to worry about how much relati ve power they 
control. Moreover, sitting below the surface in both regions is significant potential for intense security competi tion and possibly even war among the leading states. 
 
Security Competition in Northeast Asia 
 
In the large literature on securi ty issues in Northeast Asia after the Cold War, almost every 
author recognizes that power politics is alive and well in the region, and that there are good reasons to worry about armed con flict involving the great powers.
31 
The American experience in the region since 1991 provides consider able evidence to 
support this pessimistic perspective. The United States came close to fighting a war against 
North Korea in June 1994 to prevent it from acquiring nuclear weapons.32 War still might break 
out between Nor th and South Korea, in which case the United States would automati cally 
become involved, since it has 37,000 troops stationed in South Korea to help counter a North 
Korean invasion. If such a war happened, American and South Korean forces would probably 
trounce the invading North Korean army, creating an opportunity for them to strike north of the 
38th parallel and unify the two Koreas.33 This is what happened in 1950, prompting China, 
which shares a border with North Korea, to feel threatened and go to war against the United States. This could plausibly happen again if there is a second Korean war. 
One might argue that the Korean problem is likely to go away soon, because relations are 
improving between the two Koreas, and there is actu ally a reasonable c hance they will reunify in 
the decade ahead. Although future relations between North and South Korea are difficult to 
predict, both sides are still poised to fight a major war along the border separating them, which 
remains the most heavily armed strip of territory in the world. Moreover, there is hardly any 
evidence—at least at this point —that North Korea intends to surrender its independence and 
become part of a unified Korea. But even if reunification happens, there is no reason to think 
that it will enh ance stability in Northeast Asia, because it will surely create pres sures to remove 
American troops from Korea and will also revive compe tition among China, Japan, and Russia 
for influence in Korea. 
Taiwan is another dangerous place where China and the U nited States could end up in a 
shooting war.
34 Taiwan appears determined to maintain its de facto independence from China, 
and possibly to gain de jure inde pendence, while China seems equally determined to 
reincorporate Taiwan into China. In fact, China h as left little doubt that it would go to war to 
prevent Taiwanese independence. The United States, however, is commit ted to help Taiwan 
defend itself if it is attacked by China, a scenario which could plausibly lead to American troops fighting with Taiwan against China. After all, between July 1995 and March 1996, China fired 
live mis siles into the waters around Taiwan and conducted military exercises off the coast of its 
Fujian province, just across the strait from Taiwan. China rattled its saber because it thought 
that Taiwan was taking major steps toward independence. The United States responded by 
sending two air craft-carrier battle groups into the waters around Taiwan. Fortunately, the crisis 
ended peacefully. 
The Taiwan problem, however, shows no si gns of going away. China is deploying large 
numbers of missiles (ballistic and cruise) in Fujian province, and it is procuring aircraft and 
naval ships from Russia that might some day make it risky for the United States to deploy naval forces in the re gion during a crisis. Furthermore, China issued a document in February 2000 in 
which it said that it was prepared to go to war before it would allow "the Taiwan issue to be 
postponed indefinitely."
35 Immediately thereafter, China and the United States exchanged thinly 
disguised nuclear threats.36 Taiwan, for its part, is shopping for new weapons to counter China's 
grow ing arsenal, while remaining determined to maintain its independence from China. The 
United States could therefore get pulled into war with China over both Korea and Taiwan. 
More needs to be said about China, the principal great -power rival of the United States in 
Northeast Asia. Many Americans may think that real ism is outmoded thinking, but this is not 
how China's leaders view the world. Ac cording to one prominent Sinologist, China "may well be 
the high church of realpolitik in the post -Cold War world."37 This is not sur prising when you 
consider China's history over the past 150 years and its present threat environment. It shares 
borders, a number of which are still disputed, with thirteen different states. China fought over 
territory with India in 1962, the Soviet Union in 1969, and Vietnam in 1979. All of these borders are still contested. China also claims ownership of Taiwan, the Senkaku/Diaoyutai Islands, and 
various island groups in the South China Sea, many of which it does not now control.
38 
Furthermore, China tends to view both Japan and the United States as potential enemies. 
Chinese leaders maintain a deep -seated fear that Japan wi ll become militaristic again, like it 
was before 1945. They also worry that the United States is bent on preventing China from 
becoming the dominant great power in Northeast Asia. "Many Chinese foreign- and defense-
policy analysts," according to one scholar, "believe that U.S. alliances with Asian countries, particularly with Japan, pose a serious, long- term challenge, if not a threat, to China's national 
security, national unification, and modernization."
39 
It is worth noting that China's relations with Japan and the United States have gotten 
worse —not better —since the end of the Cold War.40 All three states were aligned against the 
Soviet Union during the 1980s, and they had little cause to fear each other. Even Taiwan was 
not a major source of friction between China and the United States during the last decade of the 
Cold War. But times have changed for the worse since 1990, and now China fears Japan and 
the United States, who, in turn, worry about China. For example, in the immediate aftermath of 
the Cold War, Japan was confident that growing economic interdependence in Asia would allow 
it to maintain peaceful relations with China for the indefinite future.41 By the mid- 1990s, 
however, Japanese views about China had "hardened considerably," and showed evi dence of 
"an anxious realism about China's strategic intentions."42 
China certainly has not been quick to employ military force over the past decade, although it 
has demonstrated more than once that it is will ing to employ the sword to achieve particular 
political goals. Besides the missile firings and military maneuvers during the Taiwan crisis, Chinese military forces in early 1995 seized Mischief Reef, one of the disputed Spratly Islands 
claimed by the Philippines. These incidents notwithstand ing, the Chinese military has limited 
power -projection capability, and therefore it cannot be too aggressive toward other states in the 
region.
43 For example, China does not have the wherewithal to defeat and conquer Taiwan in a 
war. To rectify that problem, however, China has embarked on a major military modernization 
program. Indeed, China decided this year (2001) to increase its defense spending by 17.7 
percent, which repre sents its largest expansion in real terms in the last two decades.44 
Another indicator of security competition in Northeast Asia is the region's burgeoning arms 
race in missile technology.45 North Korea has been developing and testing ballistic missiles 
throughout the 1990s, and in August 1998 it fired a missile over Japan. In response to the 
growing North Korean missile threat, South Korea is making moves to increase the range of its 
own ballistic missiles, while Japan and the United States are moving to build a "theater missile 
defense" (TMD) system to protect Japan as well as American forces stationed in the region. The 
United States is also determined to build a "national missile defense" (NMD) system to protect 
the American homeland from nuclear attacks by small powers such as North Korea. China, 
however, has made it clear that if Japan and the United States deploy missile defenses of any 
kind, it will markedly increase its arsenal of ballistic missiles so that it can overwhelm them. 
Independent of these developments, China is deploying large numbers of missiles opposite 
Taiwan, which, not su rprisingly, is now trying to acquire defensive systems from the United 
States. But if the United States aids Taiwan, especially if it helps Taiwan develop its own TMD 
system, China is sure to increase its arsenal of missiles, which would force the United S tates to 
upgrade its TMD system in the region, which would force China to build more missiles, and so 
on. How all this missile -building will play out over time is difficult to predict, but the key point is 
that an arms race centered on ballistic missiles i s already underway in Asia and shows few 
signs of abating. 
Finally, the fact that the United States maintains one hundred thousand troops in Northeast 
Asia contradicts the claim that the region is "primed for peace."46 If that were so, those U.S. 
forces would be unnecessary and they could be sent home and demobilized, saving the 
American taxpayer an appreciable sum of money. Instead, they are kept in place to help paci fy 
a potentially volatile region. 
Joseph Nye, one o f the main architects of post -Cold War American pol icy in Northeast Asia 
and a scholar with a well -established reputation as a liberal international -relations theorist (not a 
realist), made this point in an important 1995 article in Foreign Affairs.*1 "It has become 
fashionable," he notes, "to say that the world after the Cold War has moved beyond the age of 
power politics to the age of geoeconomics. Such cliches reflect nar row analysis. Politics and 
economics are connected. International eco nomic system s rest upon international political 
order." He then makes the "pacifier" argument: "The U.S. presence [in Asia] is a force for 
stability, reducing the need for arms buildups and deterring the rise of hegemonic forces." Not 
only do "forward- deployed forces in Asia ensure broad regional stability," they also "contribute to 
the tremendous political and economic advances made by the nations of the region." In short, "the United States is the critical variable in the East Asia security equation." 
48 
 
Security Competition in Europe 
 
Europe might appear to be a better place than Northeast Asia to make the optimists' case, 
but on close inspection the evidence shows that security competition and the threat of great -
power war remain facts of life in Europe, too. Consider the series of wars that have been fought 
in the Balkans in the 1990s, and that the United States and its European allies have twice been 
directly involved in the fighting. American airpower was used against Serb ground forces in 
Bosnia during the summer of 1995, helping to end the fighting in that embattled country. In the 
spring of 1999, NATO went to war against Serbia over Kosovo. It was a minor conflict for sure, 
but the fact remains that in the years since the Cold War ended, the United States has fought a 
war in Europe, not in Northeast Asia. 
The evolution of Russian foreign policy during the 1990s provides fur ther evidence that 
realism still has a lot to say about inter -state relations in Europe. After the Soviet Union 
collapsed, it was widel y believed that Russia's new leaders would follow in Mikhail Gorbachev's 
footsteps and eschew the selfish pursuit of power, because they recognized that it made Russia less, not more, secure. Instead, they would work with the United States and its NATO all ies to 
create a peaceful order that reached across all of Europe. 
But this is not what has happened. NATO's actions in the Balkans and its expansion 
eastward have angered and scared the Russians, who now view the world clearly through 
realist lenses and do not even pay lip serv ice to the idea of working with the West to build what 
Gorbachev called "a common European home."
49 Russia's hardheaded view of its external 
environment is reflected in "The National Security Concept of the Russian Federation," a 
seminal policy document that Russian president Vladimir Putin signed on January 10, 2000. 
"The formation of international rela tions," it states, "is accompanied by competition and also by 
the aspiration of a number of states to strengthen their influence on global politics, including by 
creating weapons of mass destruction. Military force and violence remain substantial aspects of 
international relations."50 
Russia also made it clear in 1993 that it would initiate nuclear war if its territorial integrity 
was threatened, thus abandoning the Soviet Union's long -standing pledge not to be the first 
state to use nuclear weapons in a war.51 Russia's military weakness, however, sharply limits 
what it can do outside of its borders to challenge the United States over issues such as NATO 
expansion and NATO policy in the Balkans. Nevertheless, Russia's actions in the breakaway 
republic of Chechnya make clear that it is will ing to wage a brutal war if it thinks its vital interests 
are threatened.52 
More evidence that great -power war remains a serious threat in Europe arises from the fact 
that the United States maintains one hundred thousand troops in the region, and its leaders 
often emphasize the impor tance of keeping NATO intact. If Europe is "primed for peace," as 
many claim, NATO would surely be disbanded and American forces would be sent home. 
Instead, they are kept in place. In fact, NATO has moved east ward and incorporated the Czech 
Republic, Hungary, and Poland into its ranks. Why? Because there is potential for dangerous 
security competition in Europe, and the United States is determined to keep the forces of trou ble 
at bay. Otherwise why would it be spending tens of billions of dollars annually to maintain a 
large military presence in Europe? 
There is considerable evidence that the pacifier argument is widely accepted among 
policymakers and scholars on both sides of the Atlantic. For example, President Clinton told the 
West Point graduating class of 1997, "Some say we no longer need NATO because there is no 
powerful threat to our security now. I say there is no powerful threat in part because NATO is 
there."53 That same year, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright told the U.S. Senate at her 
confirmation hearing, "We have an interest in European security, because we wish to avoid the 
instability that drew five million Americans across the Atlantic to fight in two world wars."54 It 
appears that many Europeans also believe in the pacifier argu ment. Between 1990 and 1994, 
Robert Art conducted more than one hundred interviews with European political -military elites. 
He found that most believed that "if the Americans removed their security blanket from Europe . 
. . the Western European states could well return to the destruc tive power politics that they had 
just spent the last forty -five years trying to banish from their part of the continent."55 Presumably 
that perspective is even more tightly held today, since the early 1990s was the heyday of 
optimism about the prospects for peace in Europe. 
Finally, it is worth noti ng that Art, Michael Mandelbaum, and Stephen Van Evera, all 
prominent scholars who believe that Europe is primed for peace, favor keeping American troops 
there and maintaining a formidable NATO. Might it be that they are ultimately guided by pacifier 
logic, not their stated belief that great -power war is no longer a danger in Europe?56 
 
Structure and Peace in the 1990s 
 
There is no question that the presence of U.S. troops in Europe and Northeast Asia has 
played an important role in moderating security com petition and promoting stability over the past 
decade. But periods of relative peace in those regions cannot be explained simply by the 
presence or absence of American forces. After all, there were no U.S. troops in Europe during 
the nineteenth century; y et there were long periods of relative peace. Moreover, even if the 
United States had committed military forces to Europe in the late 1930s, there still would have been intense security competition among the great powers, and Nazi Germany might have 
starte d a major war anyway. 
To understand why the great powers were so tame in the 1990s, it is necessary to consider 
the overall distribution of power in each area, which means determining how much power is 
controlled by each major state in the region, as well as by the United States. In essence, we 
need to know whether the system is bipolar or multipolar, and if it - is multipolar, whether it is 
unbalanced by the presence of a potential hegemon. Bipolar systems, as we saw in Chapter 9, tend to be the most peacef ul, whereas unbalanced multipolar systems are the most prone to 
conflict. Balanced multipolar systems fall somewhere in between. 
Europe remains bipolar in the wake of the Cold War, with Russia and the United States as 
the region's principal rivals. There are three particular aspects of Europe's bipolarity that make it 
especially stable. First, both Russia and the United States are armed with nuclear weapons, 
which are a force for peace. Second, the United States behaves -as an offshore bal ancer in 
Europe, a cting primarily as a check on any local great power that tries to dominate the region. It 
has no hegemonic aspirations beyond the Western Hemisphere, which significantly reduces the threat it presents to the states of Europe." Third, Russia, which is a loc al great power that might 
have territorial ambitions, is too weak militarily to cause serious trouble outside of its own borders.
58 
Northeast Asia, on the other hand, is now a balanced multipolar sys tem; China, Russia, and 
the United States are the relevant great powers, and none has the markings of a potential hegemon. Balanced multipolarity tends to be less stable than bipolarity, but the same three 
factors that enhanced the prospects for peace in bipolar Europe do likewise in multi -polar 
Northeast Asia. First, China, Russia, and the United States all have nuclear arsenals, which 
makes them less likely to initiate war with each other. Second, although the United States is 
clearly the most powerful actor in the region, it is an offshore balancer without territorial 
aspirations. Third, neither the Chinese nor the Russian military has much power -projection 
capability, making it difficult for them to behave aggres sively toward other states in the area. 
There are two possible objections to my description of how power is distributed in Europe 
and Northeast Asia. Some might argue that the post -Cold War world is unipolar, which is 
another way of saying that the United States is a global hegemon.
59 If true, there would be 
hardly any security competition in Europe and Northeast Asia, because there would be no great 
powers in those areas —by definition— to challenge the mighty United States. This is certainly 
the state of affairs in the Western Hemisphere, where the United States is the only great power, 
and it is not i nvolved in security competition with any of its neighbors. Canada and Mexico, for 
example, pose no military threat whatsoever to the United States. Nor does Cuba, which is a minor political irritant, not a serious threat to American security. 
But the inter national system is not unipolar.
60 Although the United States is a hegemon in 
the Western Hemisphere, it is not a global hege mon. Certainly the United States is the 
preponderant economic and mili tary power in the world, but there are two other great powers in 
the international system: China and Russia. Neither can match American mil itary might, but both 
have nuclear arsenals, the capability to contest and probably thwart a U.S. invasion of their 
homeland, and limited power -projection capability.61 They are not Canada and Mexico. 
Furthermore, hardly any evidence indicates that the United States is about to take a stab at 
establishing global hegemony. It certainly is deter mined to remain the hegemon in the Western 
Hemisphere, but given the difficulty of pr ojecting power across large bodies of water, the United 
States is not going to use its military for offensive purposes in either Europe or Northeast Asia. 
Indeed, America's allies worry mainly that U.S. troops will be sent home, not that they will be 
used for conquest. This lack of a hegemonic impulse outside the confines of the Western 
Hemisphere explains why no balancing coalition has formed against the United States since the 
Cold War ended.62 
Others might argue that America's allies from the Cold War —the United Kingdom, France, 
Germany, Italy, and Japan—should count as great powers, an accounting that would produce 
markedly different power distributions in Europe and Northeast Asia. There is little doubt that 
these states, especially Germany and Japan, have the potential in terms of population and 
wealth to become great powers (see Tables 10.1 and 10.2). They do not qualify for that ranking, 
however, because they depend in large part on the United States for their security; they are 
effec tively semi -sove reign states, not great powers. In particular, Germany and Japan have no 
nuclear weapons of their own and instead rely on the American nuclear deterrent for protection. 
In addition, America's allies have little maneuver room in their foreign policy, becaus e of the 
presence of U.S. troops on their territory. The United States continues to occupy Western 
Europe and to dominate NATO decision- making, much the way it did during the Cold War, not 
only mak ing war among its members unlikely, but also making it dif ficult for any of those states 
(especially Germany) to cause trouble with Russia.63 Finally, the United States continues to 
maintain a formidable military presence in Japan, making it difficult for that potentially powerful 
state to engage in serious secur ity competition with China. 
In sum, a good deal of evidence indicates that power politics has not been stamped out of 
Europe and Northeast Asia, and that there is potential for serious trouble involving the great powers. Nevertheless, both regions have been largely free of intense security competition and 
great -power war during the 1990s. The taproot of that stability is the particular distribution of 
power that has emerged in each area since the Cold War ended and the Soviet Union collapsed. The question we must now ask is whether the structure of power in each of those 
regions is likely to remain intact over the next two decades. 
 
Trouble Ahead 
 
Predicting what the distribution of power will look like in Europe and Northeast Asia by 2020 
involves two closely related tasks: 1) reckon ing the power levels of the main actors located in 
each region, paying spe cial attention to whether there is a potential hegemon among them; and 
2) assessing the likelihood that the United States will remain militarily engaged in those regions, 
which depends largely on whether there is a potential hegemon among the local great powers 
that can be contained only with American help. It is difficult to predict the balance of power in a 
region, because it depends in good part on determining how fast each state's economy will 
grow, as well as its long -term political viability. Unfortunately, we do not have theories that can 
anticipate economic and political developments with high confidence. For example, it is hard to know how pow erful the Chinese and Russian economies will be in 2020, or whether China will 
survive as a single political entity or break apart like the Soviet Union. 
It is still possible, however, to make informed judgments about the architectures that are 
likely to e merge in Europe and Northeast Asia over the next twenty years. We can start with the 
conservative assumption that there will be no fundamental change in the relative wealth or 
political for tunes of the principal states in each region. In other words, the existing distribution of 
potential power remains essentially intact for the next two decades. Alternatively, we can assume significant change in state capabili ties, focusing on the most weighty scenarios in each 
region, such as the complete collapse of Russian power or China's transformation into an eco -
nomic superpower. The future of the American military presence in each region will depend on whether there is a potential hegemon. 
I believe that the existing power structures in Europe and Northeast Asia a re not sustainable 
through 2020. Two alternative futures loom on the horizon, both of which are likely to be less 
peaceful than the 1990s. If there is no significant change in the relative wealth or the political 
integri ty of the key states located in eac h region, the United States is likely to bring its troops 
home, because they will not be needed to contain a poten tial hegemon. Removing American 
forces from either region, however, would change the structure of power in ways that would 
make conflict more likely than it is today. The structural change would be greater in Europe than 
in Northeast Asia, as would the likelihood of intensified security competition. 
But if fundamental economic or political change occurs in either region and a potential 
hegemon emerges that the local powers cannot contain, U.S. troops are likely to remain in place 
or come back to the region to bal ance against that threat. Should that happen, an intense 
security competi tion would likely ensue between the potential hegemon and it s rivals, including 
the United States. In short, either the United States will leave Europe or Northeast Asia because it does not have to contain an emerging peer competitor, in which case the region would 
become less stable, or the United States will stay engaged to contain a formidable rival in what 
is like ly to be a dangerous situation. Either way, relations between the great powers are likely to 
become less peaceful than they were during the 1990s. Before analyzing future power 
structures in Europe and Northeast Asia, it is necessary to look more closely at the claim that 
only the presence of a potential hegemon can keep the United States militarily engaged in those regions. A widely touted alternative perspective claims that American troops will stay put in the 
absence of a potential hegemon, because peace in those strategically important areas is a vital 
U.S. interest, and it would be difficult to achieve without the American pacifier. This claim needs to be examined. 
 
The Future of the American Pacifi er 
 
The central aim of American foreign policy, as emphasized in Chapter 5, is to be the 
hegemon in the Western Hemisphere and have no rival hegemon in either Europe or Northeast 
Asia. The United States does not want a peer competitor. In the wake of the C old War, U.S. 
policymakers remain firmly committed to that goal. Consider the following excerpt from an important Pentagon planning document that was leaked to the press in 1992: "Our first objective 
is to prevent the reemergence of a new rival . . . that poses a threat on the order of that posed 
formerly by the Soviet Union. . . . Our strategy must now refocus on precluding the emergence 
of any potential future global competitor."
64 
In pursuit of this goal, the United States has historically behaved as an offshore balancer in 
Europe and Northeast Asia. As pointed out in Chapter 7, it has committed troops to those areas only when there was a potential hegemon in the neighborhood that the local great powers could 
not contain by themselves. In effect, the Unit ed States has traditionally pursued a buck -passing 
strategy when faced with a potential peer competitor Therefore, the future of the U.S. military 
commitments to Europe and Northeast Asia hinge on whether there is a potential hegemon in either of those reg ions that can be contained only with American help. If not, the one hundred 
thousand U.S. troops in each region would likely leave in the near future. As discussed below, no great power is likely to be in a position to overrun either Europe or Northeast As ia anytime 
soon, with the possible exception of China. Therefore, the United States will probably bring its 
troops home in the first decade or so of the new century.
65 
 America the Peacekeeper 
 Nevertheless, a different rationale has emerged for maintaini ng a robust American military 
presence in those regions. The United States, so the argument goes, has a deep- seated 
interest in maintaining peace in Europe and Northeast Asia, and bringing its troops home would probably lead to instability, and maybe even great -power war.
66 Peace in these regions is said 
to be of vital importance to the United States for two reasons. For one thing, American 
economic prosperity would be undermined by a major war in either area. Given the high levels 
of economic interdependence among the world's wealthiest powers, a great -power war would 
not only badly damage the economies of the warring states, it would also seriously hurt the 
American economy, even if the United States managed to stay out of the fighting. 
Moreover, the United States invariably gets dragged into distant great -power wars, which 
means it is an illusion for Americans to think that they can sit out a big war in either Europe or 
Northeast Asia. It therefore makes sense for the United States to maintain forces in those 
regions and preserve the peace, so that large numbers of Americans do not die in a future war. 
Presumably this perspective leads to an open- ended commit ment of U.S. troops across both the 
Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans. 
There is little doubt that peace in Europe and Northeast Asia is a desir able goal for the 
United States. The key issue, however, is whether peace is important enough to justify putting U.S. troops in harm's way, which is the risk the United States runs if it stations troops in those 
regions. In fact, peace in these two wealthy regions is not a vital American interest. The 
rationale for this alternative perspective is unconvincing and it receives little support from the 
historical record. 
Consider the claim that a war in Europe or Northeast Asia would undermine American 
prosperity. It is based on assertion, not analysis. Indeed, the only study I know of on the subject 
contradicts that claim. It concludes that "the primary effect of overseas wars on the economies 
of neutral countries is t o redistribute wealth from belligerents to non- combatants, enriching 
neutrals rather than impover ishing them."67 In essence, the United States would probably 
become more prosperous in the event of an Asian or a European war, and it would probably also gai n relative power over the warring great powers. This is what happened to the United 
States when it was neutral in World War I: after some initial prob lems, the American economy 
flourished, while the economies of the European great powers were badly damaged.
68 There is 
little reason to think that a major war in Europe or Northeast Asia today would seriously damage 
the American economy, as it is "roughly as vulnerable to a major great power war in Asia as it 
was to World War I, but it is only half as vul nerable today to disruptions in Europe as it was early 
in the 20th Century."69 
But even if this anal ysis is wrong and a great -power war in Europe or Northeast Asia would 
make Americans less prosperous, the United States is still unlikely to fight a major war just to 
ensure continued economic pros perity. Two prominent cases in recent times support this point. 
The United States did not use, or even seriously consider using, military force against any of the 
members of OPEC during the oil crisis of the mid- 1970s , even though OPEC's actions at the 
time undermined American prosperity.70 Furthermore, in the fall of 1990, the administration of 
President George H. W. Bush briefly tried to justify the impending Persian Gulf War on the 
grounds that Iraq's invasion of Kuwait had to be reversed because it threat ened American jobs. 
This argument was heavily criticized and quickly abandoned.71 If the United States was unwilling 
to fight a war against weak oil -producing states for the sake of economic prosperity, it is hard to 
imag ine it engaging in a great -power war for the same purpose. 
The claim that the United States invariably gets drawn into great -power wars in Europe and 
Northeast Asia is also not persuasive. Both the United Kingdom and the United States are offshore balancers who get pulled into great -power conflicts only when there is a potential 
hegemon in the region that the local great powers cannot contain by themselves. For example, 
both the United Kingdom and the United States were content to sit out the Franco- Prussian War 
(1870- 71) and the Russo -Japanese War (1904 -5), because neither was a hegemonic war. 
Moreover, the United States would not have entered World War I or World War II if the 
European great pow ers had been able to contain Germany by themselves. But in early 1917, 
and again in the summer of 1940, Germany threatened to overrun Europe, forcing the United 
States to accept a continental commitment. 
One might counter that, if the United States stays put in Europe and Northeast Asia, there 
would be no great -power war and therefore no danger that Americans might have to suffer the 
horrible costs of war. But there are two related problems with this line of argument. Although an 
American military presence would probably make war less likely, there is no guarantee that a 
great -power conflict would not break out. For exam ple, if the U.S. military stays put in Northeast 
Asia, it cou ld plausibly end up in a war with China over Taiwan. Furthermore, if a great -power 
war did occur, the United States would surely be involved from the start, which does not make 
good strategic sense. It would be best for the United States either not to become involved in the 
fighting or, if it had to join the war, to do so later rather than earlier. That way the United States 
would pay a much smaller price than would the states that fought from start to finish, and it 
would be well -positioned at the war's end to win the peace and shape the postwar world to its 
advantage. 
Putting these different rationales aside, what does the historical record tell us about 
American willingness to play the role of peacemaker or peacekeeper in Europe and Northeast 
Asia? As we saw in Chapter 7, hardly any evidence before 1990 shows that the United States is 
willing to commit troops to those regions to maintain peace. American armies were sent there to 
prevent the rise of peer competitors, not to maintain peace. One might concede this history but 
argue that the more relevant evidence is what happened during the 1990s, when American 
troops remained in Europe and Northeast Asia even though no great power threatened to 
dominate either region. 
 
The 1990s: Anomaly or Precedent? 
 
This is all true, of course, and what has happened so far does appear to contradict the 
predictions of offensive realism. A closer look at the situa tion, however, reveals that too little 
time has passed since the Cold War ended to make a judgment about whether U.S. forces will 
stay put in Europe and Northeast Asia in the absence of the Soviet Union or an equivalent 
great -power threat. The Soviet Union broke apart at the end of 1991, only ten years ago, and 
the last Russian troops were removed from the former East Germany in 1994, a mere seven years ago. Given the sud denness of the Soviet collapse, as well as its profound effect on the 
balance of power in Europe and Northeast Asia, there was no question that the United States 
would need time to figure out what the new architec tures in each region meant for American 
interests. To give some historical perspective on this matter, remember that although World War 
I ended in 1918, U.S. troops were not completely withdrawn from Europe until 1923, and British 
troops r emained on the continent until 1930 (twelve years after the war ended). 
Simple inertia is also an important factor in delaying the American withdrawal. The United 
States has deployed large- scale military forces in Europe since 1943, when it invaded Italy 
during World War II, and in Northeast Asia since 1945, when it occupied Japan at the end of 
World War II. Moreover, both NATO and the American alliance structure in Northeast Asia are 
institutions with deep roots that helped win a spectacular victory in t he Cold War. The United 
States would not walk away from them overnight.
72 Furthermore, maintaining forces in Europe 
and Northeast Asia since the 1990s has been relatively cheap and painless for the United 
States. Not only has the American economy flourished during that period, generating large 
budget surpluses in the process, but China and Russia have been easy to con tain, because 
they are much weaker than the United States. 
This matter of a lag time aside, there is considerable evidence that the United St ates and its 
allies from the Cold War are "drifting apart."73 This trend is most apparent in Europe, where 
NATO's 1999 war against Serbia and its messy aftermath have damaged transatlantic relations 
and prompt ed the European Union to begin building a mili tary force of its own that can operate 
independently of NATO —which means independently of the United States.74 The United 
Kingdom, France, Germany, and Italy are slowly but inexorably realizing that they want to 
provide for their own security and control t heir own destiny. They are less willing to take orders 
from the United States than they were during the Cold War. Japan, too, is showing signs of 
independent behavior.75 Moreover, the American com mitment to defend Europe and Northeast 
Asia shows signs of weakening. Public opinion polls and congressional sentiment seem to indicate that the United States is at best a "reluctant sheriff" on the world stage, and that over 
time America's military role in those two strategically important areas is likely to dimi nish, not 
increase.
76 
Given that the United States is widely recognized to be a pacifying force in Europe and 
Northeast Asia, one might wonder why its allies would assert their independence from the 
United States, a move that is almost certain to cause transatlantic friction, if not a divorce. Some 
might say that this is evidence that America's former allies are balancing against the mighty 
United States. But that response is not convincing, because the United States has no appetite 
for conquest and dominat ion outside of the Western Hemisphere; offshore balancers do not 
provoke balancing coalitions against themselves. Indeed, their main mission is to balance 
against dangerous rivals. 
No, America's Cold War allies have started to act less like dependents of t he United States 
and more like sovereign states because they fear that the offshore balancer that has protected 
them for so long might prove to be unreliable in a future crisis. The reliability of the United 
States was not a serious problem during the Cold War, because the Soviet threat provided a 
powerful incentive for the United States to protect its allies, who were too weak to defend themselves against an attack by the Warsaw Pact. Without that galvanizing threat, however, America has begun to look like a less dependable ally to states such as Germany and Japan, 
which are capable of protecting themselves from any threat in their own region. 
One source of concern among America's allies in Europe and Northeast Asia is the 
widespread belief that it will ine vitably draw down its forces in those regions; this belief raises 
doubts about the seriousness of the U.S. commitment, as well as the ability of the United States to act in a crisis to defend its allies.
77 The United States is also sure to pursue policies that will 
raise doubts about whether it is a wise and reliable ally, if only because U.S. interests are not identical to those of its allies. For example, President Clinton, hoping to improve Sino- American 
relations, visited China for nine days in 1998 wit hout stopping in Japan. This trip's itinerary was 
seen by Japanese leaders as evidence that their alliance with the United States was 
weakening.
78 In Europe, the ongoing Kosovo crisis has raised doubts about American 
leadership. Moreover, the United States and its European allies have conflicting views about 
Middle East policy, about employing NATO forces outside of Europe, and especially about developing a national mis sile defense. Over time, differences of this sort are likely to cause 
America's allies t o provide for their own security, rather than rely on the United States for 
protection.
79 The international system, as emphasized in Chapter 2, is a self -help world. 
In sum, the brief history of the 1990s is not a good indicator of what the future holds fo r 
American military involvement in Europe and Northeast Asia. That issue will be resolved in the 
early years of the twenty -first cen tury, and the determining factor will be whether there is a 
potential hege mon in either region that the United States must help contain. Only the threat of a 
peer competitor is likely to provide sufficient incentive for the United States to risk involvement 
in a distant great -power war. The United States is an offshore balancer, not the world's sheriff. 
 
Structure and Conflict in Tomorrow’s Europe 
 Five European states now have sufficient wealth and population to be a great power: the 
United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, and Russia. Furthermore, Germany has the 
earmarking of a potential hegemon. Among European states, it is clearly the wealthiest, has the 
largest population save for Russia, and has the most powerful army in the region (see Table 
10.2). Nevertheless, Germany is not a great power today, much less a potential hegemon, 
because it has no nuclear weapons of its own and because it is heavily dependent on the 
United States for its security. But if American troops were pulled out of Europe and Germany 
became responsible for its own defense, it would probably acquire its own nuclear arsenal and 
increase the size of its army, transforming itself into a poten tial hegemon. 
To illustrate Germany's potential military might, consider the popula tion and wealth 
differentials between Germany and Russia during the twentieth century. Although Russia has 
always enjoyed a significant pop ulation advantage over Germany, its present advantage is 
smaller than at any other time in the past hundred years. For example, Russia had approximately 2.6 times as many people as Germany in 1913 (175 million vs. 67 million), one 
year before World War I broke out, and twice as many people in 1940 (170 million vs. 85 
million), one year before Nazi Germany invaded the Soviet Union.
80 This population 
disadvantage notwithstanding, Germany was a potential hegemon in both of those years. In 
1987, a repres entative year of the Cold War, the Soviet Union had roughly 4.7 times as many 
people as West Germany (285 million vs. 61 million). Russia today, however, has only about 1.8 
times as many peo ple as Germany (147 million vs. 82 million).81 
Despite its smalle r population, Germany was a potential hegemon in Europe from 1903 to 
1918 and from 1939 to 1945, primarily because it had a marked advantage in wealth over 
Russia. For example, Germany enjoyed roughly a 3.6:1 advantage in industrial might over 
Russia in 1913, and an approximately 1.3:1 advantage over the Soviet Union in 1940. Today, 
Germany has a startling 6.6:1 advantage in wealth over Russia.82 Thus, Germany now has a 
significant advantage in latent military power over Russia, much like it had in the earl y twentieth 
century, when it was the dominant military power in Europe. 
Regarding actual military might, the German army is superior to the Russian army. The size 
of Germany's standing army is 221,100 soldiers, and it can be quickly augmented by 295,400 reserves, thus creating a highly effective fighting force of more than half a million soldiers.
83 
Russia has about 348,000 soldiers in its standing army, and although it has a large pool of 
reserves, they are poorly trained and Russia would have great diffic ulty mobilizing any of them 
quickly and efficiently in a crisis. Thus, those reserves contribute little to Russia's fighting power, and Germany therefore has a somewhat larger army than Russia. In terms of quality, the 
German army is well -trained and well -led, whereas the Russian army is neither. Only on the 
nuclear front does Russia dominate, but Germany has the wherewithal to rectify this asymmetry 
if it decides to acquire its own nuclear deterrent. 
Although Germany is likely to become a potential hegemon if it has to provide for its own 
security, the United States is still likely to pull its forces out of Europe. Despite Germany's significant military potential, the other European powers should be able to keep it from 
dominating Europe without help from the United States. The United Kingdom, France, Italy, and 
Russia together have about three times as many people as Germany, and their combined 
wealth is roughly three times greater than Germany's. Plus, the United Kingdom, France, and 
Russia have nuclear w eapons, which should be a strong deterrent against an expansionist 
Germany, even if it has its own nuclear weapons. 
Yet Europe may not remain peaceful without the American pacifier. Indeed, there is likely to 
be intense security competition among the great powers, with the ever -present possibility that 
they might fight among themselves, because upon American withdrawal Europe would go from benign bipolarity to unbalanced multipolarity, the most dangerous kind of power structure. The 
United Kingdom, France, Italy, and Germany would have to build up their own military forces 
and provide for their own secu rity. In effect, they would all become great powers, making 
Europe multi -polar. And as we saw above, Germany would probably become a potential 
hegemon and thus the main source of trouble in- the new Europe. 
To illustrate the kind of trouble that might lie ahead, consider how par ticular German 
measures aimed at enhancing its security might nevertheless lead to instability. As discussed 
above, Germany would lik ely move to acquire its own nuclear arsenal if the United States 
removed its security umbrella from over western Europe. Not only are nuclear weapons an 
excellent deterrent, a point widely recognized by Germany's governing elites during the Cold 
War, but G ermany would be surrounded by three nuclear -armed states —the United Kingdom, 
France, and Russia—leaving it vulnerable to nuclear coercion.
84 During the proliferation 
process, how ever, Germany's neighbors would probably contemplate using force to prevent i t 
from going nuclear. 
Furthermore, without the American military on its territory, Germany would probably increase 
the size of its army and it certainly would be more inclined to try to dominate central Europe. Why? Germany would fear Russian control of that critically important buffer zone between them, 
a situation that would directly threaten Germany. Of course, Russia would have the same fear 
about Germany, which would likely lead to a serious security competition between them for 
control of central Europe. France would undoubtedly view such behavior by Germany with alarm 
and take measures to protect itself from Germany. For example, France might increase its 
defense spending and establish closer relations with Russia. Germany would likely view these 
actions as hostile and respond with measures of its own. 
So, the United States is likely to pull its troops back across the Atlantic Ocean in the years 
immediately ahead, if there is no significant change in the present distribution of potential 
power, even though that move is likely to intensify security competition in Europe and render it 
less peaceful. 
Europe's future could turn out differently, however. The two most con sequential scenarios 
involve Russia. In the first, Russia, not Germany, will become Europe's next potential hegemon. For that to happen, Russia, which already has a larger population than Germany, must also 
become the wealthier of the two states. Although it is difficult to predict the future of the Russian 
economy, it is hard to imagine Russ ia becoming wealthier than Germany in the next twenty 
years. But in the unlikely event that happens and Russia is once again a potential hegemon, the other European pow ers—the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and Italy —should be able to 
contain Russia wit hout help from the United States. After all, Germany is now unified and 
wealthy, and Russia has only about half the population of the former Soviet Union, which makes it almost impossible for Russia to build a military machine as powerful as the Soviet arm y was in 
its heyday.
85 Of course, a wealthy Russia would not be a paper tiger, it would simply not be so 
formidable that American troops would be needed to contain it. 
In the other scenario, the Russian economy collapses, possibly causing severe political 
turmoil, and Russia is effectively removed from the ranks of the great powers. Thus it will be able to do little to help contain Germany. This alternative future is not likely, either, but should it 
come to pass, U.S. troops would surely remain in Europe t o help the United Kingdom, France, 
Italy, and Russia check German expansion. Both of these scenarios involve a potential hegemon (either Russia or Germany) in a multipolar Europe, a situation that is likely to result in 
dangerous security competition among the great powers. 
 
Structure and Conflict in Tomorrow’s Northeast Asia 
 Three Northeast Asian states presently have sufficient population and wealth to be great 
powers: China, Japan, and Russia. But none is a potential hegemon. Japan is by far the 
wealthiest state in the region. Its gross national product (GNP) is about 3.5 ti mes as large as 
China's and more than 12 times as large as Russia's (see Table 10.1). Nevertheless, Japan is not in a position to convert its substantial wealth into a decisive military advantage that could be 
used to threaten the rest of Northeast Asia.
86 Although Japan has much greater wealth than do 
either China or Russia, it has a relatively small population, especially compared to China's. In 
fact, China's population is almost ten times larger than Japan's, and it appears that the gap 
between them will widen further over the next fifty years.87 Thus, it would be almost impossible 
for Japan to build an army that is more powerful than China's army. Japan could certainly build 
an army that is qualitatively superior to China's, but not so much better that i t would offset the 
10:1 advantage in numbers that China could maintain because of its huge population. 
Japan would also face a serious power -projection problem if it tried to overrun Northeast 
Asia. It is an insular state that is physically separated from the Asian mainland by a substantial 
body of water. Thus, unless Japan is able to secure a foothold on the Asian continent —which is 
unlikely —it would have to invade the Asian mainland from the sea to conquer it. This was not a 
problem between 1895 and 1945, because China and Korea were so weak that Japan had little 
difficulty establishing and maintaining a large army on the continent. China and Korea are much 
more formidable adversaries today, and they would surely use their armies to oppose a 
Japanese invasion of the Asian mainland. Amphibious operations against territory controlled by 
China and Korea would be a daunting task. In short, if Japan shakes loose the United States 
and becomes a great power in the next decade or so, it is more likely to look lik e the United 
Kingdom in mid- nineteenth- century Europe than Japan in the first half of the twentieth century. 
There is also little chance that Russia will become a potential hegemon in Northeast Asia by 
2020. It is hard to imagine Russia building a more pow erful economy than Japan's anytime 
soon. But even if Russia experi ences spectacular economic growth, it still has essentially the 
same popu lation problem vis -a-vis China that Japan faces. Specifically, China has more than 
eight times as many people as Russia and the gap between them is likely to widen over time.88 
Thus, not even a wealthy Russia is likely to be able to field an army more powerful than China's. 
Russia's problems are further compounded by the fact it has significant security concerns in 
Europe and on its southern borders, which limit the military resources it can devote to Northeast 
Asia.89 
China is the key to understanding the future distribution of power in Northeast Asia.90 It is 
clearly not a potential hegemon today, because it is not nearly as wealthy as Japan. But if 
China's economy continues expanding over the next two decades at or near the rate it has been 
growing since the early 1980s, China will likely surpass Japan as the wealthiest state in Asia. Indeed, because of the vast size of China's population, it has the potential to become much 
wealthier than Japan, and even wealthier than the United States. 
To illustrate China's potential, consider the following scenarios. Japan's per capita GNP is 
now more than 40 times greater than China's. If China modernizes to the point where it has 
about the same per capita GNP as South Korea does today, China would have a GNP of 
$10.66 tril lion, substantially larger than Japan's $4.09 trillion economy (see Table 10.3). If 
China's per capita GNP grew to be just half of Japan's present per capita GNP, China would 
have a GNP of $20.04 trillion, which would make China almost five times as wealthy as Japan. Finally, if China had about the same per capita GNP as Japan, China would be ten times as 
wealthy as Japan, because China has almost ten times as many people as Japan. 
Another way of illustrating how powerful China might become if its economy continues 
growing rapidly is to compare it with the United States. The GNP of the United States is $7.9 trillion. If China's per capita GNP equals Korea's, China's overall GNP would be almost $10.66 
trillion, which is about 1.35 times the size of America's GNP. If China's per capita GNP is half of Japan's, China's overall GNP would then be roughly 2.5 times bigger than America's. For 
purposes of comparison, the Soviet Union was roughly one- half as wealthy as the United States 
during, most of the Cold War (see Table 3.5). China, in short, has the potential to be 
considerably more powerful than even the United States. 
It is difficult to predict where the Chinese economy is headed in the twenty -first century and 
thus whether China will overtake Japan and become a potential hegemon in Northeast Asia.
91 
Nonetheless, the princi pal ingredients of military power in that region are likely to be distributed 
in one of two ways in the decades ahead. 
First, if China's economy stops growing at a rapid pace and Japan remains the wealthiest 
state in Northeast Asia, neither would become a potential hegemon and the United States w ould 
likely bring its troops home. If that happened, Japan would almost surely establish itself as a 
great power, building its own nuclear deterrent and significantly increasing the size of its 
conventional forces. But there woul d still be balanced multipolarity in the region: Japan would 
replace the United States, and China and Russia would remain the region's other great powers. 
In short, an American exit would not change the basic structure of power in Northeast Asia, and 
presumably would not make war mo re or less likely than it is today. 
Nevertheless, substituting Japan for the United States would increase the likelihood of 
instability in Northeast Asia. Whereas the United States has a robust nuclear deterrent that 
contributes to peace, Japan has no nucl ear weapons of its own and would have to build its own 
nuclear arse nal. That proliferation process, however, would be fraught with dangers, especially 
because China, and maybe Russia, would be tempted to use force to prevent a nuclear Japan. 
In addition, the deep -seated fear of Japan in Asia that is a legacy of its behavior between 1931 
and 1945 would surely be fanned if Japan acquired a nuclear deterrent, intensifying security 
competition in the region. Furthermore, as an offshore balancer, the United States has hardly 
any interest in conquering territory in Northeast Asia. As noted above, Japan would face 
profound limits on its ability to project power onto the Asian mainland as long as China remains 
a great power. Still, Japan has territorial disputes wi th China over the Senkaku/Diaoyutai 
Islands, wi th Korea over the Takeshima/Toky o Islets, and with Russia over the Kurile Islands. 
Finally, although China is militar ily too weak to fight a major war with the mighty United States, 
China is not likely to be as outgunned by Japan, which simply does not have the population nor 
the wealth to fully replace America's military power. 
The second possible distribution of power would result if China's econ omy continues 
growing at a robust pace and it eventually becom es a potential hegemon. The United States 
would either remain in Northeast Asia or return someday to make sure that China does not 
become a peer competitor. Japan and Russia together are unlikely to have the wherewithal to 
contain China, even if India, South Korea, and Vietnam were to join the balancing coalition. Not 
only would China be much wealthier than any of its Asian rivals in this scenario, but its huge population advantage would allow it to build a far more powerful army than either Japan or 
Russ ia could. China would also have the resources to acquire an impressive nuclear arsenal. 
Northeast Asia would obviously be an unbal anced multipolar system if China threatened to 
dominate the entire region; as such it would be a far more dangerous place than it is now. 
China, like all previous potential hegemons, would be strongly inclined to become a real 
hegemon, and all of its rivals, including the United States, would encircle China to try to keep it 
from expanding. Engagement poli cies and the like woul d not dull China's appetite for power, 
which would be considerable. 
In sum, although the power structures that are., now in place in Europe and Northeast Asia 
are benign, they are not sustainable over the next twenty years. The most likely scenario in 
Euro pe is an American exit coupled with the emergence of Germany as the dominant state. In 
effect, the region will probably move from its present bipolarity to unbalanced multi -polarity, 
which will lead to more intense security competition among the European great powers. In 
Northeast Asia, the power structure is likely to evolve in one of two ways: 1) If China does not 
become a potential hege mon, the United States is likely to pull its troops out of the area, 
causing Japan to become a formidable great power. The system, however, would remain 
multipolar and balanced. Still, security competition would be somewhat more intense than it is 
today because of problems associated with Japan's replacing the United States in the regional 
lineup of great powers. 2) If China emerges as a potential hegemon, Northeast Asia's 
multipolarity would become unbalanced and the United States would keep forces in the region 
to contain China. 
 
Conclusion 
 
What are the implications of the preceding analysis for future American national security 
policy? It is clear that the most danger ous scenario the United States might face in the early 
twenty -first century is one in which China becomes a potential hegemon in Northeast Asia. Of 
course, China's prospects of becoming a potential hegemon depend largely on whether its 
economy continues modernizing at a rapid pace. If that happens, and China becomes not only a leading producer of cutting- edge technologies, but the world's wealthiest great power, it would 
almost cer tainly use its wealth to build a mighty military machine. Moreover, for sound strategic 
reasons, it would surely pursue regional hegemony, just as the United States did in the Western 
Hemisphere during the nineteenth century. So we would expect China to attempt to dominate 
Japan and Korea, as well as other regional actors, by building military forces that are so 
powerful that those other states would not dare challenge it. We would also expect China to 
develop its own version of the Monroe Doctrine, directed at the United States. J ust as the 
United States made it clear to dis tant great powers that they were not allowed to meddle in the 
Western Hemisphere, China will make it clear that American interference in Asia is 
unacceptable. 
What makes a future Chinese threat so worrisome is that it might be far more powerful and 
dangerous than any of the potential hegemons that the United States confronted in the twentieth 
century. Neither Wilhelmine Germany, nor imperial Japan, nor Nazi Germany, nor the Soviet 
Union had nearly as much latent power as the United States had during their confrontations 
(see Tables 3.5 and 6.2). But if China were to become a giant Hong Kong, it would probably have somewhere on the order of four times as much latent power as the United States does, allowing China to gain a decisive military advantage over the United States in Northeast Asia.
92 
In that circumstance, it is hard to see how the United States could prevent China from becoming 
a peer competitor. Moreover, China would likely be a more formidable superpow er than the 
United States in the ensuing global competition between them. 
This analysis suggests that the United States has a profound interest in seeing Chinese 
economic growth slow considerably in the years ahead. For much of the past decade, however, 
the United States has pursued a strategy intended to have the opposite effect. The United 
States has been committed to "engaging" China, not "containing" it. Engagement is predi cated 
on the liberal belief that if China could be made both democratic and pros perous, it would 
become a status quo power and not engage in security competition with the United States. As a result, American policy has sought to integrate China into the world economy and facilitate its 
rapid economic development, so that it becomes wealthy and, one would hope, content with its 
present position in the international system. 
This U.S. policy on China'is misguided. A wealthy China would not be a status quo power 
but an aggressive state determined to achieve regional hegemony. This is not because a rich 
China would have wicked motives, but because the best way for any state to maximize its 
prospects for sur vival is to be the hegemon in its region of the world. Although it is cer tainly in 
China's interest to be the hegemon in Northeast Asia, it is clearly not in America's interest to 
have that happen. 
China is still far away from the point where it has enough latent power to make a run at 
regional hegemony. So it is not too late for the United States to reverse course and do what it 
can to s low the rise of China. In fact, the structural imperatives of the international system, 
which are powerful, will probably force the United States to abandon its policy of constructive 
engagement in the near future. Indeed, there are signs that the new Bush administration has 
taken the first steps in this direction. 
Of course, states occasionally ignore the anarchic world in which they operate, choosing 
instead to pursue strategies that contradict balance- of-power logic. The United States is a good 
candidate for behaving in that way, because American political culture is deeply liberal and 
correspond ingly hostile to realist ideas. It would be a grave mistake, however, for the United 
States to turn its back on the realist principles that have served it well s ince its founding. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes 
 
CHAPTER ONE 
 1. The phrase "perpetual peace" was made famous by Immanuel Kant. See his "Perpetual 
Peace," in Hans Reiss, ed., Kant's Political Writings, trans. H. B. Nisbet (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1970), pp. 93 -130. Also see John Mueller, Retreat from D oomsday: The 
Obsolescence of Major War (New York: Basic Books, 1989); Michael Mandelbaum, "Is Major War Obsolete?" Survival 40, No. 4 (Winter 1998- 99), pp. 20- 38; and Francis Fukuyama, "The 
End of History?" The National Interest, No, 16 (Summer 1989), pp. 3 -18, which was the basis of 
Francis Fukuyama, The End of History and the Last Man (New York: Free Press, 1992). 
2. Charles L. Glaser, "Realists as Optimists: Cooperation as Self -Help," International 
Security 19, No. 3 (Winter 1994 -95), pp. 50 -90. 
3. The balance of power is a concept that has a variety of meanings. See Inis L. Claude, Jr., 
Power and International Relations (New York: Random House, 1962), chap. 2; and Ernst B. Haas, "The Balance of Power: Prescription, Concept, or Propaganda?" World Politics 5, No. 4 
(July 1953), pp. 442- 77. I use it to mean the actual distribution of military assets among the 
great powers in the system. 
4. Quoted in Lothar Gall, Bismarck: The White Revolutionary, vol. 1, 1851- 1871, trans. J. A. 
Underwood (London: Unwin Hyman, 1986), p. 59. 
5. Nevertheless, the theory has relevance for smaller powers, although for some more than 
for others. Kenneth Waltz puts the point well when he writes, "A general theory of international 
politics . . . once written also applies to lesser st ates that interact insofar as their interactions are 
insulated from the intervention of the great powers of a system, whether by the relative 
indifference of the latter or by dif ficulties of communication and transportation." Waltz, Theory of 
International Politics (Reading, MA: Addison- Wesley, 1979), p. 73. 
6. For other definitions of a great power, see Jack S. Levy, War in the Modern Great Power 
System, 1495 -1975 (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1983), pp. 10 -19. 
7. There is little disagreement among scholars about which states qualified as the great 
powers between 1792 and 1990. See Levy, War, chap. 2; and J. David Singer and Melvin 
Small, The Wages of War, 1816- 1965: A Statistical Handbook (New York: Wiley, 1972) , p. 23. I 
have accepted the conventional wisdom because it appears to be generally consistent with my definition of a great power, and to ana lyze each potential great power "on a case -by-case basis 
would be prohibitive in time and resources, and in the end it might make little difference." Levy, 
War, p. 26. Russia (the Soviet Union from 1917 to 1991) is the only state that was a great power 
for the entire period. The United Kingdom and Germany (Prussia before 1870) were great powers from 1792 to 1945, and France was a great power from 1792 until it was defeated and 
occupied by Nazi Germany in 1940. Some scholars label the United Kingdom, France, and 
Germany as great powers after 1945 and classify the much more powerful Soviet Union and 
United States as superpowers. I do not find these labels useful. Although I sometimes refer to 
the United States and the Soviet Union as superpowers, they were the great powers in the 
system during the Cold War, when the United Kingdom, France, and Germany (as well as China 
and Japan) lacked the military capability to qualify as great powers. Italy is treated as a great 
power from 1861 until 1943, when it collapsed in World War II. Austria- Hungary (Austria before 
1867) was a great power from 1792 until it dis integrated in 1918. Japan is considered a great 
power from 1895 until 1945, and the United States is usually designated a great power from 
1898 until 1990. Regarding the period from 1991 to 2000, China (which is treated as a great 
power from 1991 onward), Russia, and the U nited States are considered great powers for 
reasons discussed in Chapter 10. 
8. Quoted in Stephen Van Evera, Causes of War: Power and the Roots of Conflict (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1999), p. 2. 
9. William J. Clinton, "Commencement Address," United States Military Academy, West 
Point, NY, May 31, 1997. Also see A National Security Strategy of Engagement and 
Enlargement (Washington, DC: The White House, February 1996). 
10. Strobe Talbott, "Why NATO Should Grow," New York Review of Books, August 10, 
1995, pp. 27 -28. Also see Strobe Talbott, "Democracy and the National Interest," Foreign Affairs 
75, No. 6 (November -December 1996), pp. 47- 63. 
11. Madeleine Albright, "A Presidential Tribute to Gerald Ford," speech at Ford Museum 
Auditorium, Grand Rapids, MI, April 16, 1997. Also see Madeleine Albright, "Commencement 
Address," Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, June 5, 1997; and Richard Holbrooke, "America, 
A European Power," Foreign Affairs 74, No. 2 (March -April 1995), pp. 38- 51. 
12. On what constit utes a sound theory, see Stephen Van Evera, Guide to Methods for 
Students of Political Science (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997), pp. 17 -21. 
13. The key work on this subject is Marc Trachtenberg, A Constructed Peace: The Making of 
the European S ettlement, 1945 -1963 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999). 
14. Although NATO employed a defensive strategy vis -a-vis the Warsaw Pact throughout 
the Cold War, Samuel Huntington argued instead for an offensive strat egy in an article that 
generated considerable controversy within the security com munity. See Samuel P. Huntington, 
"Conventional Deterrence and Conventional Retaliation in Europe," International Security 8, No. 
3 (Winter 1983- 84), pp. 32- 56. 
15. This point is made clear in Michael W. Doyle, Ways of War and Peace: Realism, 
Liberalism, and Socialism (New York: Norton, 1997); and Brian C. Schmidt, The Political 
Discourse of Anarchy: A Disciplinary History of International Relations (Albany: State University 
of New York Press, 1998). 
16. E. H. Carr, The Twenty Years' Crisis, 1919- 1939: An Introduction to the Study of 
International Relations, 2d ed. (London: Macmillan, 1962; the first edition was published in 
1939); Hans Morgenthau, Politics among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace, 5th ed. 
(New York: Knopf, 1973; the first edition was published in 1948); and Waltz, Theory of 
International Politics. 
17. Carr, Twenty Years' Crisis, chap. 4; Kenneth Waltz, "The Myth of National 
Interdependence," in Charles P. Kindelberger, ed., The International Corporation (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1970), pp. 205 -223; and Waltz, Theory of International Politics, chap. 7. 
18. See Morgenthau, Politics among Nations, chaps. 14, 21; and Kenneth N. Waltz, "The 
Stability of a Bipolar World," Daedalus 93, No. 3 (Summer 1964), pp. 881- 909. 
19. For further evidence of those differences, see Security Studies 5, No. 2 (Winter 1995- 96, 
special issue on "Roots of Realism," ed. Benjamin Frankel); and Security Studies 5, No. 3 
(Spring 1996, special issue on "R ealism: Restatements and Renewal," ed. Benjamin Frankel). 
20. See F. H. Hinsley, Power and the Pursuit of Peace: Theory and Practice in the History of 
Relations between States (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967), pt. I; Torbjorn L. 
Knutsen, A His tory of International Relations Theory: An Introduction (New York: Manchester 
University Press, 1992), chap. 5; and F. Parkinson, The Philosophy of International Relations: A 
Study in the History of Thought (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, 1977), chap. 4. 
21. See Andrew Moravcsik, "Taking Preferences Seriously: A Liberal Theory of International 
Politics," International Organization 51, No. 4 (Autumn 1997), pp. 513- 53. 
22. See Michael Howard, War and the Liberal Conscience (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers 
University Press, 1978). 
23. See inter alia Norman Angell, The Great Illusion: A Study of the Relation of Military 
Power in Nations to Their Economic and Social Advantage, 3d rev. and enl. ed. (New York: G. P. Putnam's, 1912); Thomas L. Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree: Understanding 
Globalization (New York: Parrar, Straus and Giroux, 1999); Edward D. Mansfield, Power, Trade, 
and War (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994); Susan M. McMillan, 
"Interdependence and Conflict," Mershon International Studies Review 41, Suppl. 1 (May 1997), 
pp. 33 -58; and Richard Rosecrance, The Rise of the Trading State: Commerce and Conquest in 
the Modern World (New York: Basic Books, 1986). 
24. Among the key works on democratic peace theory are Michael E. Brown, Sean M. Lynn-
Jones, and Steven E. Miller, eds., Debating the Democratic Peace (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1996), pts. I and III; Michael Doyle, "Liberalism and World Politics," American Political Science 
Review 80, No. 4 (December 1986), pp. 1151 -69; Fukuyama, "End of History?"; John M. Owen 
IV, Liberal Peace, Liberal War: American Politics and International Security (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1997); James L. Ray, Democracy and International Conflict: An Evaluation of the Democratic Peace Proposi tion (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1995); and 
Bruce Russett, Grasping the Democratic Peace: Principles for a Post -Cold War World 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993). Some scholars argue that democ racies are 
more peaceful than non- democracies, regardless of the regime type of their adversary. But the 
evidence for this proposition is weak; stronger evidence exists for the claim that the pacific effects of democracy are limited to relations between democratic states. 
25. See int er alia David A. Baldwin, ed., Neorealism and Neoliberalism: The Contemporary 
Debate (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993); Robert O. Keohane, After Hegemony: 
Cooperation and Discord in the World Political Economy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1984); International Organization 36, No. 2 (Spring 1982, special issue on "International 
Regimes," ed. Stephen D. Krasner); Lisa L. Martin and Beth A. Simmons, "Theories and 
Empirical Studies of International Institutions," International Organizat ion 52, No. 4 (Autumn 
1998), pp. 729- 57; and John G. Ruggie, Constructing the World Polity: Essays on International 
Institutionalization (New York: Routledge, 1998), chaps. 8 -10. Regimes and interna tional law 
are synonymous with institutions, since all ar e essentially rules that states negotiate among 
themselves. 
26. Carr, Twenty Years' Crisis, p. 10. 
27. Although realists believe that the international system allows for little variation in the 
external conduct of great powers, they recognize that there ar e sometimes profound differences 
in how governments deal with their own people. For example, although the Soviet Union and the 
United States behaved similarly toward each other during the Cold War, there is no question 
that the leaders of each superpower t reated their citizens in fundamentally different ways. Thus, 
one can rather easily distinguish between good and bad states when assessing internal con -
duct. Such distinctions, however, tell us relatively little about international politics. 
28. Morgenthau is something of an exception regarding this second belief. Like other 
realists, he does not distinguish between good and bad states, and he clearly recognizes that external environment shapes state behavior. However, the desire for power, which he sees as 
the main driving force behind state behavior, is an internal characteristic of states. 
29. Carl von Clausewitz, On War, trans. and ed. Michael Howard and Peter Paret 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976), esp. books 1, 8. Also see Richard K. Betts, 
"Should Strategic Studies Survive?" World Politics 50, No. 1 (October 1997), pp. 7- 33, esp. p. 8; 
and Michael I. Handel, Masters of War: Classical Strategic Thought, 3d ed. (London: Frank 
Cass, 2001). 
30. Michael J. Smith notes in Realist Thought from Weber to Kissinger (Baton Rouge: 
Louisiana State University Press, 1986) that Carr does not "explain why pol itics always involves 
power, an explanation vital to any attempt to channel the exercise of power along lines compatible with an ordered social existence. Is a lust for power basic to human nature —the 
view of Niebuhr and Morgenthau—. . . [or] is it the result of a security dilemma?" (p. 93). 
31. George P. Kennan, American Diplomacy, 1900- 1950 (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press , 1951). Smith writes, "Kennan nowhere offers a systematic explanation of his approach to 
international politics or of his political philosophy in gener al: he is a diplomat turned historian, 
not a theologian or a political theorist, and he is concerned neither to propound a doctrine of 
human nature nor to set forth the recurring truths of international politics in a quasi -doctrinal 
way." Smith, Realist Thought, p. 166. 
32. Human nature realism lost much of its appeal in the early 1970s for a vari ety of reasons. 
The backlash against the Vietnam War surely contributed to its demise, since any theory that 
saw the pursuit of military power as inevitable was likely to be unpopular on university 
campuses by 1970. [Ironically, Morgenthau was an early and vocal critic of the Vietnam War. 
See Hans J. Morgenthau, Vietnam and the United States (Washington, DC: Public Affairs, 
1965); and "Bernard Johnson's Interview with Hans J. Morgenthau," in Kenneth Thompson and Robert J. Myers, eds., Truth and Tragedy: A Tribute to Ham J. Morgenthau (New Brunswick, 
NJ: Transaction Books, 1984), pp. 382- 84.] Furthermore, the collapse of the Bretton Woods 
system in 1971, the oil shock of 1973, and the growing power of multinational corporations (MNCs) led many to think that economic issues had become more important than security 
issues, and that realism, especially Morgenthau's brand, had little to say about questions of 
international political economy. Some even argued in the early 1970s that MNCs and other 
transnational for ces were threatening the integrity of the state itself. "Sovereignty at bay" was a 
widely used phrase at the time. Finally, human nature realism was essentially a philosophical 
theory that was out of sync with the behavioral revolution that was overwhelming the study of 
international politics in the early 1970s. Morgenthau intensely disliked modern social science 
theories, but he was badly outnumbered in this war of ideas and his theory lost much of its 
legitimacy. For Morgenthau's views on social science, see Hans J. Morgenthau, Scientific Man 
vs. Power Politics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1946). For a recent but rare example 
of human nature realism, see Samuel P. Huntington, "Why International Primacy Matters," 
International Security 17, No. 4 ( Spring 1993), pp. 68- 71. Also see Bradley A. Thayer, "Bringing 
in Darwin: Evolutionary Theory, Realism, and International Politics," International Security 25, 
No. 2 (Fall 2000), pp. 124- 51. 
33. See Morgenthau, Politics among Nations; and Morgenthau, Scien tific Man. Although 
Morgenthau is the most famous human nature realist, Reinhold Niebuhr was also a major intellectual force in this school of thought. See Niebuhr's Moral Man and Immoral Society (New 
York: Scribner's, 1932). Friedrich Meinecke made the case for human nature realism at 
considerable length well before Morgenthau began publishing his views on international politics 
in the mid- 1940s. See Meinecke's Machiavellism: The Doctrine ofRaison d'Etat and Its Place in 
Modern History, trans. Douglas Scot t (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1984), which was originally 
published in Germany in 1924 but was not published in English until 1957. Morgenthau, who was educated in Germany, was familiar with Machiavellism, according to his former student 
Kenneth W. Thompson. C orrespondence with author, August 9, 1999. Also see Christoph Frei, 
Hans J. Morgenthau: An Intellectual Biography (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 
2001), pp. 207- 26. 
34. Morgenthau, Scientific Man, p. 194. Also see Morgenthau, Politics among Nations, p. 
208. 
35. Morgenthau, Scientific Man, p. 192. Despite his claim that "the desire to attain a 
maximum of power is universal" (Politics among Nations, p. 208), Morgenthau distinguishes between status quo and revisionist powers in his writ ings. Politics among Nations, pp. 40 -44, 
64-73. But there is an obvious problem here: if all states have a "limitless aspiration for power" 
(Politics among Nations, p. 208), how can there be status quo powers in the world? Moreover, 
although Morgenthau emphasizes that the drive for power is located in human nature, he also 
recognizes that the structure of the international system creates powerful incentives for states to 
pursue offense. He writes, for example, "Since ... all nations live in constant fear lest thei r rivals 
deprive them, at the first opportune moment, of their power posi tion, all nations have a vital 
interest in anticipating such a development and doing unto the others what they do not want the 
others to do unto them" (Politics among Nations, p. 208 ). However, if all states have a vital 
interest in taking advantage of each other whenever the opportunity presents itself, how can 
there be status quo powers in the system? Indeed, this incentive structure would seem to leave 
no room for satiated powers. Again, Morgenthau provides no explanation for this apparent 
contradiction. Arnold Wolfers notes this same problem in Morgenthau's work. See Wolfers's 
Discord and Collaboration: Essays on International Politics (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press , 1962), pp. 84 -86. 
36. Waltz's other key works on realism include Man, the State, and War: A Theoretical 
Analysis (New York: Columbia University Press, 1959); "Theory of International Relations," in 
Fred I. Greenstein and Nelson W. Polsby, eds., The Handbook of Political Science, vol. 8, 
International Politics (Reading, MA: Addison- Wesley, 1975), pp. 1- 85; "The Origins of War in 
Neorealist Theory," in Robert I. Rotberg and Theodore K. Rabb, eds., The Origin and Prevention of Major Wars (Cambridge: Cambridg e University Press, 1989), pp. 39- 52; and 
"Reflections on Theory of International Politics: A Response to My Critics," in Robert Keohane, 
ed., Neorealism and Its Critics (New York: Columbia University Press, 1986), pp. 322- 45. Unlike 
Morgenthau's Politics among Nations, Waltz's Theory of International Politics clearly qualifies as 
a work of modern social science (esp. its chap. 1). 
37. Structural theories emphasize that the configuration of the international system sharply 
constrains the behavior o f the great powers and forces them to act in similar ways. Thus, we 
should expect to find common patterns of great -power behavior in anarchic systems. 
Nevertheless, anarchic systems themselves can be configured differently, depending on the 
number of great powers and how power is distributed among them. As discussed in subsequent 
chapters, those structural differences sometimes cause important variations in state behavior. 
38. Waltz, Theory of International Politics, p. 126. Also see ibid., pp. 118, 127; and Joseph 
M. Grieco, "Anarchy and the Limits of Cooperation: A Realist Critique of the Newest Liberal 
Institutionalism," International Organization 42, No. 3 (Summer 1988), pp. 485- 507, which builds 
directly on Waltz's claim that states are mainly concerned with preserving their share of world 
power. 
39. Randall L. Schweller, "Neorealism's Status -Quo Bias: What Security Dilemma?" Security 
Studies 5, No. 3 (Spring 1996, special issue), pp. 90- 121. Also see Keith L. Shimko, "Realism, 
Neorealism, and American Liberalism," Review of Politics 54, No. 2 (Spring 1992), pp. 281 -301. 
40. Waltz, Theory of International Politics, chaps. 6, 8. The other key work emphasizing that 
states have a powerful tendency to balance against aggressors is Stephen M. Walt, The Origins 
of Alliances (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1987). 
41. See Waltz, Theory of International Politics, chap. 8; and Waltz, "Origins of War." 
42. Waltz, "Origins of War," p. 40. 
43. The key works include Robert Jervis, "Cooperation under the Security Dilemma," World 
Politics 30, No. 2 (January 1978), pp. 167- 214; Jack L. Snyder, Myths of Empire: Domestic 
Politics and International Ambition (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991), esp. chaps. 1 -2; 
and Van Evera, Causes of War, esp. chap. 6. Also see Glaser, "Realists as Optimists"; and 
Robert Powell, In the Shadow of Power: States and Strategies in International Politics 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999), esp. chap. 3. George Quester's Offense and 
Defense in the International System (New York: Wiley, 1977) is an important book on the 
offense -defense balance, although he is generally not considered a defensive realist. For an 
overview of the literature on the subject, see Sean M. Lynn- Jones, "Offense- Defense Theory 
and Its Critics," Se curity Studies 4, No. 4 (Summer 1995), pp. 660- 91. 
44. Jervis has a more qualified view on this point than either Snyder or Van Evera. See 
Snyder, Myths of Empire, pp. 22 -24; Van Evera, Causes of War, pp. 118, 191, 255. 
45. Grieco, "Anarchy and the Limits of Cooperation," p. 500. 
46. Some defensive realists emphasize that great powers seek to maximize secu rity, not 
relative power. "The ultimate concern of states," Waltz writes, "is not for power but for security." 
Waltz, "Origins of War," p. 40. There is no question that great powers maximize security, but 
that claim by itself is vague and provides little insight into actual state behavior. The important 
question is, How do states maximize security? My answer: By maximizing their share of world 
power. Def ensive realists' answer: By preserving the existing balance of power. Snyder puts the 
point well in Myths of Empire when he writes that both offensive and defensive realists "accept that security is normally the strongest motivation of states in international anarchy, but they 
have opposite views about the most effective way to achieve it" (pp. 11- 12). 
47. G. Lowes Dickinson, The European Anarchy (New York: Macmillan, 1916). Also see G. 
Lowes Dickinson, The International Anarchy, 1904- 1914 (New York: Centur y Company, 1926), 
esp. chap. 1. 
48. Dickinson, European Anarchy, pp. 14, 101. 
49. Eric Labs, Nicholas Spykman, and Martin Wight also make the case for offensive realism 
in their writings, although none lays the theory out in any detail. See Eric J. Labs, " Offensive 
Realism and Why States Expand Their War Aims," Security Studies 6, No. 4, pp. 1 -49; Nicholas 
J. Spykman, America's Strategy in World Politics: The United States and the Balance of Power 
(New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1942), introduction and chap. 1; and Martin Wight, Power Politics, 
eds. Hedley Bull and Carsten Holbraad (New York: Holmes and Meier, 1978), chaps. 2, 3, 9, 14, 15. One also catches glimpses of the theory in Herbert Butterfield, Christianity and History (New 
York: Scribner's, 1950), pp. 89 -91; Dale C. Copeland, The Origins of Major War (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 2000), passim; Robert Gilpin, War and Change in World Politics 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), pp. 87 -88; John H. Herz, "Idealist 
Internationalism and the Security Dilemma," World Politics 2, No. 2 (January 1950), p. 157; John H. Herz, Political Realism and Political Idealism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1951), pp. 14- 15, 23 -25, 206; A.RK. Organski, World Politics, 2d ed. (New York: Knopf, 1968), 
pp. 274, 279, 298; Frederick L. Schuman, International Politics: An Introduction to the Western 
State System (New York: McGraw -Hill, 1933), pp. 512- 19; and Fareed Zakaria, From Wealth to 
Power: The Unusual Origins of America's World Role (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1998), pas sim. Finally, aspects of Randall Schweller's important work are consistent with 
offensive realism. See Schweller, "Neorealism's Status -Quo Bias"; Randall L. Schweller, 
"Bandwagoning for Profit: Bringing the Revisionist State Back In," International Security 19, No. 1 .(Summer 1994), pp. 72- 107; and Randall L. Schweller, Deadly Imbalances: Tripolarity and 
Hitler's Str ategy of World Conquest (New York: Columbia University Press, 1998). However, as 
Gideon Rose makes clear, it is difficult to classify Schweller as an offensive realist. See Gideon 
Rose, "Neoclassical Realism and Theories of Foreign Policy," World Politics 51, No. 1 (October 
1998), pp. 144- 72. 
50. See Inis L. Claude, Power and International Relations (New York: Random House, 
1962); August Heckscher, ed., The Politics ofWoodrow Wilson: Selections from His Speeches 
and Writings (New York: Harper, 1956); and Ja mes Brown Scott, ed., President Wilson's 
Foreign Policy: Messages, Addresses, Papers (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1918). 
51. Quoted in Wight, Power Politics, p. 29. 
52. William J. Clinton, "American Foreign Policy and the Democratic Ideal," campaign 
speech, Pabst Theater, Milwaukee, WI, October 1, 1992. 
53. "In Clinton's Words: 'Building Lines of Partnership and Bridges to the Future,'" New York 
Times, July 10, 1997. 
54. See Shimko, "Realism, Neorealism, and American Liberalism." 
55. See Seymour Mart in Lipset, American Exceptionalism: A Double- Edged Sword (New 
York: Norton, 1996), pp. 51- 52, 237. Also see Gabriel A. Almond, The American People and 
Foreign Policy (New York: Praeger, 1968), pp. 50 -51. 
56. Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, vol. II, trans. Henry Reeve (New York: 
Schocken Books, 1972), p. 38. 
57. Morgenthau, Scientific Man, -p. 201. 
58. See Reinhold Niebuhr, The Children of Light and the Children of Darkness: A 
Vindication of Democracy and a Critique of Its Traditional Defense (New York: Scribner's, 1944), 
esp. pp. 153 -90. 
59. Lipset, American Exceptionalism, p. 63. 
60. See Samuel P. Huntington, The Soldier and the State: The Theory and Practice of Civil -
Military Relations (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1957). 
61. For example, it is apparent from archival -based studies of the early Cold War that 
American policymakers thought largely in terms of power politics, not ide ology, when dealing 
with the Soviet Union. See H. W. Brands, The Specter of Neutralism: The United States and the 
Emergence of the Third World, 1947- 1960 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1989); 
Thomas J. Christensen, Useful Adversaries: Grand Strategy, Domestic Mobilization, and Sino-
American Conflict, 1947- 1958 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Pr ess, 1996); Melvyn P. 
Leffler, A Preponderance of Power: National Security, the Truman Administration, and the Cold 
War (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1992); and Trachtenberg, Constructed Peace. 
Also see Keith Wilson, "British Power in the European Balance, 1906 -14," in David Dilks, ed., 
Retreat from Power: Studies in Britain's Foreign Policy of the Twentieth Century, vol. 1, 1906 -
1939 (London: Macmillan, 1981), pp. 21- 41, which describes how British policymakers 
"constantly and consistently empl oyed the concept of the balance of power" (p. 22) in private 
but employed more idealistic rhetoric in their public utterances. 
62. Kennan, American Diplomacy, p. 82. For examples of other realists empha sizing this 
theme, see Walter Lippmann, U.S. Foreign Policy: Shield of the Republic (Boston: Little, Brown, 
1943); Hans Morgenthau, In Defense of the National Interest: A Critical Examination of 
American Foreign Policy (New York: Knopf, 1951); Norman A. Graebner, America as a World 
Power: A Realist Appraisal from Wilson to Reagan (Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources, 
1984); and Norman A. Graebner, Cold War Diplomacy: American Foreign Policy, 1945- 1975, 2d 
ed. (New York: Van Nostrand, 1977). 
63. Carr, Twenty Years' Crisis, p. 79. For evidence that this kind of hypocrisy is not limited to 
Anglo -Saxons, see Markus Fischer, "Feudal Europe, 800 -1300: Communal Discourse and 
Conflictual Practices," International Organization 46, No. 2 (Spring 1992), pp. 427 -66. 
64. The key work on this subject is Ido Oren, "The Subjectivity of the 'Democratic' Peace: 
Changing U.S. Perceptions of Imperial Germany," International Security 20, No. 2 (Fall 1995), pp. 147 -84. For additional evidence on the examples discussed in this paragraph and the next, 
see Konrad H. Jarausch, "Huns, Krauts, or Good Germans? The German Image in America, 
1800- 1980," in James F. Harris, ed., German -American Interrelations: Heritage and Challenge 
(Tubingen: Tubingen University Press, 1985), pp. 145- 59; Frank Trom mler, "Inventing the 
Enemy: German- American Cultural Relations, 1900- 1917," in Hans -Jurgen Schroder, ed., 
Confrontation and Cooperation: Germany and the United States in the Era of World War I, 
1900- 1924 (Providence, RI: Berg Publishers, 1993), pp. 99- 125; and John L. Gaddis, The 
United States and the Origins of the Cold War, 1941- 1947 (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1972), chap. 2. For discussions of how British policymakers worked to clean up Russia's image during both world wars, see Keith Neilson, Britain and the Last Tsar: British Policy and 
Russia, 1894- 1917 (Oxford: Clarendon, 1995), pp. 342- 43; and P.M.H. Bell, John Bull and the 
Bear: British Public Opinion, Foreign Policy and the Soviet Union, 1941- 1945 (London: Edward 
Arnold, 1990). 
65. The c lassic statement on the profound impact of liberal ideas on American thinking is 
Louis Hartz, The Liberal Tradition in America: An Interpretation of American Political Thought 
since the Revolution (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1955). 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER TW O 
 
1. Most realist scholars allow in their theories for status quo powers that are not hegemons. 
At least some states, they argue, are likely to be satisfied with the balance of power and thus have no incentive to change it. See Randall L. Schweller, "Neor ealism's Status -Quo Bias: What 
Security Dilemma?" Security Studies 5, No. 3 (Spring 1996, special issue on "Realism: 
Restatements and Renewal," ed. Benjamin Frankel), pp. 98 -101; and Arnold Wolfers, Discord 
and Collaboration: Essays on International Politi cs (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 1962), pp. 84 -86, 91- 92, 125- 26. 
2. Milton Friedman, Essays in Positive Economics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1953), p. 14. Also see Kenneth N. Waltz, Theory of International Politics (Reading, MA: 
Addison- Wesley, 1979), pp. 5 -6, 91, 119. 
3. Terry Moe makes a helpful distinction between assumptions that are simply useful 
simplifications of reality (i.e., realistic in themselves but with unnecessary details omitted), and 
assumptions that are clear ly contrary to reality (i.e., that direct ly violate well- established truths). 
See Moe, "On the Scientific Status of Rational Models," American Journal of Political Science 
23, No. 1 (February 1979), pp. 215- 43. 
4. The concept of anarchy and its consequenc es for international politics was first articulated 
by G. Lowes Dickinson, The European Anarchy (New York: Macmillan, 1916). For a more 
recent and more elaborate discussion of anarchy, see Waltz, Theory of International Politics, pp. 
88-93. Also see Robert J. Art and Robert Jervis, eds., International Politics: Anarchy, Force, 
Imperialism (Boston: Little, Brown, 1973), pt. 1; and Helen Milner, "The Assumption of Anarchy 
in International Relations Theory: A Critique," Review of International Studies 17, No. 1 (January 
1991), pp. 67- 85. 
5. Although the focus in this study is on the state system, realist logic can be applied to 
other kinds of anarchic systems. After all, it is the absence of central authority, not any special 
characteristic of states, that caus es them to compete for power. Markus Fischer, for example, 
applies the theory to Europe in the Middle Ages, before the state system emerged in 1648. See 
Fischer, "Feudal Europe, 800- 1300: Communal Discourse and Conflictual Practices," 
International Organiz ation 46, No. 2 (Spring 1992), pp. 427- 66. The theory can also be used to 
explain the behavior of individuals. The most important work in this regard is Thomas Hobbes, 
Leviathan, ed. C. B. Macpherson (Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin, 1986). Also see Elijah 
Anderson, "The Code of the Streets," Atlantic Monthly, May 1994, pp. 80- 94; Barry R. Posen, 
"The Security Dilemma and Ethnic Conflict," Survival^, No. 1 (Spring 1993), pp \ 27-47; and 
Robert J. Spitzer, The Politics.of Gun Control (Chatham, NJ: Chatham House, 1995), chap. 6. 
6. Inis L. Claude, Jr., Swords into Plowshares: The Problems and Progress of International 
Organization, 4th ed. (New York: Random House, 1971), p. 14. 
7. The claim that states might have benign intentions is simply a starting assumption. I 
argue subsequently that when you combine the theory's five assump tions, states are put in a 
position in which they are strongly disposed to having hos tile intentions toward each other. 
8. My theory ultimately argues that great powers behave offensively t oward each other 
because that is the best way for them to guarantee "their security in an anarchic world. The 
assumption here, however, is that there are many reasons besides security for why a state 
might behave aggressively toward another state. In fact, it is uncertainty about whether those 
non-security causes of war are at play, or might come into play, that pushes great powers to 
worry about their survival and thus act offensively. Security concerns alone cannot cause great powers to act aggressively. The possibility that at least one state might be motivated by non-
secu rity calculations is a necessary condition for offensive realism, as well as for any other 
structural theory of international politics that predicts security competition. Schweller puts the 
point well: "If states are assumed to seek nothing more than their own survival, why would they 
feel threatened? Why would they engage in balancing behavior? In a hypothetical world that has 
never experienced crime, the concept of security is meaningl ess." Schweller, "Neorealism's 
Status -Quo Bias," p. 91. Herbert Butterfield makes essentially the same point when he writes, 
"Wars would hardly be likely to occur if all men were Christian saints, competing with one 
another in nothing, perhaps, save self -renunciation." C. T. Mclntire, ed., Herbert Butterfield: 
Writings on Christianity and History. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979), p. 73. Also see 
Jack Donnelly, Realism and International Relations (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), chap. 2. 
9. Quoted in Jon Jacobson, When the Soviet Union Entered World Politics (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1994), p. 271. 
10. See Elizabeth Pond, Beyond the Wall: Germany's Road to Unification (Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution Press, 1993), chap. 12; Margaret Thatcher, The Downing Street Years 
(New York: HarperCollins, 1993), chaps. 25 -26; and Philip Zelikow and Condoleezza Rice, 
Germany Unified and Europe Transformed: A Study in Statecraft (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1995), chap. 4. 
11. Frederick Schuman introduced the concept of self -help in International Politics: An 
Introduction to the Western State System (New York: McGraw -Hill, 1933), pp. 199 -202, 514, 
although Waltz made the concept famous in Theory of International Politics, chap. 6. On realism 
and alliances, see Stephen M. Walt, The Origins of Alliances (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1987). 
12. Quoted in Martin Wight, Power Politics (London: Royal Institute of International Affairs, 
1946), p. 40. 
13. If one state achieves hegemony, the system ceases to be anarchic and becomes 
hierarchic. Offensive realism, which assumes international anarchy, has little to say about politics under hierarchy. But as discussed later, it is highly unlike ly that any state will become a 
global hegemon, although regional hegemony is feasible. Thus, realism is likely to provide 
important insights about world politics for the foreseeable future, save for what goes on inside in 
a region that is dominated by a hegemon. 
14. Although great powers always have aggressive intentions, they are not always 
aggressors, mainly because sometimes they do not have the capability to behave aggressively. 
I use the term "aggressor" throughout this book to denote great powers that have the material 
wherewithal to act on their aggressive intentions. 
15. Kenneth Waltz maintains that great powers should not pursue hegemony but instead 
should aim to control an "appropriate" amount of world power. See Waltz, "The Origins of War in Neorealist Theory," in Robert I. Rotberg and Theodore K. Rabb, eds., The Origin and 
Prevention of Major Wars (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), p. 40. 
16. The following hypothetical example illustrates this point. Assume that American 
policymakers were forced to choose between two different power bal ances in the Western 
Hemisphere. The first is the present distribution of power, whereby the United States is a 
hegemon that no state in the region would dare chal lenge militarily. In the second scena rio, 
China replaces Canada and Germany takes the place of Mexico. Even though the United States 
would have a signific ant military advantage over both China and Germany, it is difficult to 
imagine any American strategist opting for this scenario over U.S. hegemony in the Western Hemisphere. 
17. John H. Herz, "Idealist Internationalism and the Security Dilemma," World Politics 2, No. 
2 (January 1950), pp. 157- 80. Although Dickinson did not use the term "security dilemma," its 
logic is clearly articulated in European Anarchy, pp. 20, 88. 
18. Herz, "Idealist Internationalism," p. 157. 
19. See Joseph M. Grieco, "Anarchy and the Limits of Cooperation: A Realist Critique of the 
Newest Liberal Institutionalism," International Organization 42, No. 3 (Summer 1988), pp. 485-507; Stephen D. Krasner, "Global Communications and National Power: Life on the Pareto 
Frontier," World Politics 43, No. 3 (April 1991), pp. 336 -66; and Robert Powell, "Absolute and 
Relative Gains in International Relations Theory," American Politic al Science Review 85, No. 4 
(December 1991), pp. 1303- 20. 
20. See Michael Mastanduno,'"Do Relative Gains Matter? America's Response to Japanese 
Industrial Policy," International Security 16, No. 1 (Summer 1991), pp. 73 -113. 
21. Waltz maintains that in Hans Morgenthau's theory, states seek power as an end in itself; 
thus, they are concerned with absolute power, not relative power. See Waltz, "Origins of War," 
pp. 40 -41; and Waltz, Theory of International Politics, pp. 126 -27. Although Morgenthau 
occasionally makes statements that appear to sup port Waltz's charge, there is abundant 
evidence in Morgenthau, Politics among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace, 5th ed. 
(New York: Knopf, 1973) that states are concerned mainly with the pursuit of relative power. 
22. Quoted in Marc Trachtenberg, A Constructed Peace: The Making of the European 
Settlement, 1945- 1963 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999), p. 36. 
23. In short, the key issue for evaluating offensive realism is not whether a state is 
const antly trying to conquer other countries or going all out in terms of defense spending, but 
whether or not great powers routinely pass up promising opportunities to gain power over rivals. 
24. See Richard K. Betts, Surprise Attack: Lessons for Defense Planning (Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution Press, 1982); James D. Fearon, "Rationalist Explanations for War," 
International Organization 49, No. 3 (Summer 1995), pp. 390- 401; Robert Jervis, The Logic of 
Images in International. Relations (Princeton, NJ: Pr inceton University Press, 1970); and 
Stephen Van Evera, Causes of War: Power and the Roots of Conflict (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1999), pp. 45 -51, 83, 137- 42. 
25. See Joel Achenbach, "The Experts in Retreat: After -the-Fact Explanations for the 
Gloomy Predictions," Washington Post, February 28, 1991; and Jacob Weisberg, "Gulfballs: 
How the Experts Blew It, Big- Time," New Republic, March 25, 1991. 26. Jack Snyder and 
Stephen Van Evera make this argument in its boldest form. See Jack Snyder, Myths of Empire: 
Domestic Politics and International Ambition (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991), esp. 
pp. 1, 307 -8; and Van Evera, Causes of War, esp. pp. 6, 9. 
27. Relatedly, some defensive realists interpret the security dilemma to say that the 
offensive measures a state takes to enhance its own security force rival states to respond in 
kind, leaving all states no better off than if they had done noth ing, and possibly even worse off. 
See Charles L. Glaser, "The Security Dilemma Revisited," World Po litics 50, No. 1 (October 
1997), pp. 171- 201. Given this under standing of the security dilemma, hardly any security 
competition should ensue among rational states, because it would be fruitless, maybe even 
counterproductive, to try to gain advantage over rival powers. Indeed, it is difficult to see why 
states operating in a world where aggressive behavior equals self -defeating behavior would 
face a "security dilemma." It would seem to make good sense for all states to forsake war and 
live in peace. Of cour se, Herz did not describe the security dilem ma this way when he 
introduced it in 1950. As noted, his original rendition of the concept is a synoptic statement of 
offensive realism. 
28. Although threatened states sometimes balance efficiently against aggressors, they often 
do not, thereby creating opportunities for successful offense. This matter will be discussed at 
length in Chapters 8 and 9. Snyder appears to be aware of this problem, as he adds the 
important qualifier "at least in the long run" to his claim that "states typically form balancing 
alliances to resist aggressors." Myths of Empire, p. 11. Aggressors, however, will be tempted to win victory in the short term, hoping they can use their success to shape the long term to their 
advantage. Regardi ng the offense -defense balance, it is an amo rphous concept that is 
especial ly difficult for scholars and policymakers to define and measure. See "Correspondence: 
Taking Offense at Offense- Defense Theory," International Security 23, No. 3 (Winter 1998 -99), 
pp. 179 -206; Jack S. Levy, "The Offensive/Defensive Balance of Military Technology: A 
Theoretical and Historical Analysis," International Studies Quarterly 28, No. 2 (June 1984), pp. 
219-38; Kier A. Lieber, "Grasping the Technological Peace: The Offense- Defense Balance and 
International Security," International Security 25, No. 1 (Summer 2000), pp. 71 -104; Scan M. 
Lynn- Jones, "Offense- Defense Theory and Its Critics," Security Studies 4, No. 4 (Summer 
1995), pp. 672- 74; John J. Mearsheimer, Conventional Deterrence (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1983), pp. 24 -27; and Jonathan Shimshoni, "Technology, Military Advantage, 
and World War I: A Case for Military Entrepreneurship," International Security 15, No. 3 (Winter 
1990- 91), pp. 187 -215. More important, there is little evidence that defense invariably has a 
crushing advantage over offense. As dis cussed in the remainder of this paragraph, states 
sometimes attack and lose, where as at other times they attack and win. 
29. John Arquilla, Du bious Battles: Aggression, Defeat, and the International System 
(Washington, DC: Crane Russak, 1992), p. 2. Also see Brace Bueno de Mesquita, The War 
Trap (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1981), pp. 21- 22; and Kevin Wang and James 
Ray, "Beginners and Winners: The Fate of Initiators of Interstate Wars Involving Great Powers 
since 1495," International Studies Quarterly 38, No. 1 (March 1994), pp. 139- 54. 
30. Although Snyder and Van Evera maintain that conquest rarely pays, both concede in 
subtle but important ways that aggression sometimes succeeds. Snyder, for example, distinguishes between expansion (successful offense) and overexpan- sion (unsuccessful 
offense), which is the behavior that he wants to explain. See, for example, his discussion of 
Japanes e expansion between 1868 and 1945 in Myths of Empire, pp. 114 -16. Van Evera allows 
for variation in the offense- defense balance, to include a few periods where conquest is 
feasible. See Causes of War, chap. 6. Of course, allowing for successful aggression contradicts 
their central claim that offense hardly ever succeeds. 
31. See Robert Gilpin, War and Change in World Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1981), p. 29; and William C. Wohlforth, The Elusive Balance: Power and Perceptions 
during the Cold War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1993), pp. 12 -14. 
32. In subsequent chapters, the power -projection problems associated with large bodies of 
water are taken into account when measuring the distribution of power (see Chapter 4). Those 
two fa ctors are treated separately here, however, sim ply to highlight the profound influence that 
oceans .have on the behavior of great powers. 
33. For an opposing view, see David M. Edelstein, "Choosing Friends and Enemies: 
Perceptions of Intentions in Interna tional Relations," Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago, August 
2000; Andrew Kydd, "Why Security Seekers Do Not Fight Each Other," Security Studies 7, No. 1 (Autumn 1997), pp. 114- 54; and Walt, Origins of Alliances. 
34. See note 8 in this chapter. 
35. Jacob Viner, "Power versus Plenty as Objectives of Foreign Policy in the Seventeenth 
and Eighteenth Centuries," World Politics 1, No. 1 (October 1948), p. 10. 
36. See Mark Bowden, Black Hawk Down: A Story of Modern War (London: Penguin, 1999); 
Alison Des Forges, "Leave None to Tell the Story": Genocide in Rwanda (New York: Human 
Rights Watch, 1999), pp. 623- 25; and Gerard Prunier, 'The Rwanda Crisis: History of a 
Genocide (New York: Columbia University Press, 1995), pp. 274- 75. 
37. See Scott R. Feil, Preventing Genocide: How the Early Use of Force Might Have 
Succeeded in Rwanda (New York: Carnegie Corporation, 1998); and John Mueller, 
"The Banality of 'Ethnic War,'" International Security 25, No. 1 (Summer 2000), pp. 58- 62. 
For a less sanguine view of how many lives would have been saved had the United States 
intervened in Rwanda, see Alan J. Kuperman, "Rwanda in Retrospect," Foreign Affairs 79, No. 
1 (January -February 2000), pp. 94- 118. 
38. See David F. Schmitz, Thank God They're on Our Side: The United States and Right -
Wing Dictatorships, 1921 -1965 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1999), chaps. 4 -
6; Gaddis Smith, The Last Years of the Monroe Doctrine, 1945- 1993 (New York: Hill and Wang, 
1994); Tony Smith , America's Mission: The United States and the Worldwide Struggle for 
Democracy in the Twentieth Century (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994); and 
Stephen Van Evera, "Why Europe Matters, Why the Third World Doesn't: American Grand 
Strategy after the Cold War," Journal of Strategic Studies 13, No. 2 (June 1990), pp. 25 -30. 
39. Quoted in John M. Carroll and George C. Herring, eds., Modern American Diplomacy, 
rev. ed. (Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources, 1996), p. 122. 
40. Nikita Khrushchev makes a similar point about Stalin's policy toward Chinese nationalist 
leader Chiang Kai -shek during World War II: "Despite his con flict with the Chinese Communist 
Party, Chiang Kai -shek was fighting against Japanese imperialism. Therefore, Stalin—and 
consequently the Soviet govern ment —considered Chiang a progressive force. Japan was our 
number one enemy in the East, so it was in the interests of the Soviet Union to support Chiang. 
Of course, we supported him only insofar as we didn't want to see him defeated by the 
Japanese—in much the same way that Churchill, who had been our enemy since the first days of the Soviet Union, was sensible enough to support us in the war against Hitler." Khrushchev 
Remembers: The Last Testament, trans. and ed. Strobe Talbott (Bos ton: Little, Brown, 1974), 
pp. 237 -38. 
41. See Walt, Origins of Alliances, pp. 5, 266 -68. 
42. Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, ed. Edwin 
Cannan (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976), Vol. 1, p. 487. All the quotes in this 
paragraph are from pp. 484- 87 of that book. 
43. For an overview of the Anglo -Dutch rivalry, see Jack S. Levy, "The Rise and Decline of 
the Anglo- Dutch Rivalry, 1609- 1689," in William R. Thompson, ed., Great Power Rivalries 
(Columbia: Univer sity of South Carolina Press, 1999), pp. 172- 200; and Paul M. Kennedy, The 
Rise and Fall of British Naval Mastery (London: Alien Lane, 1976), chap. 2. This example has 
direct bearing on the earlier discus sion of relative versus absolute power. Specificall y, without 
the Navigation Act, both England and Holland probably would have made greater absolute 
gains, because their economies would have benefited from open trade. England, however, 
proba bly would not have gained much of a relative advantage over Holland. With the Navigation 
Act, England gained a significant relative advantage over Holland, but both sides suffered in 
terms of absolute gains. The bottom line is that relative power considerations drive great -power 
behavior. 
44. William J. Clinton, "Addres s by the President to the 48th Session of the United Nations 
General Assembly," United Nations, New York, September 27, 1993. Also see George Bush, 
"Toward a New World Order: Address by the President to a Joint Session of Congress," 
September 11, 1990. 
45. Bradley Thayer examined whether the victorious powers were able to cre ate and 
maintain stable security orders in the aftermath of the Napoleonic Wars, World War I, and World 
War II, or whether they competed among themselves for power, as realism would pr edict. In 
particular, he looked at the workings of the Concert of Europe, the League of Nations, and the United Nations, which were pur portedly designed to limit, if not eliminate, realist behavior by the 
great power s. Thayer concludes that the rhetoric of the triumphant powers notwithstanding, they 
remained firmly committed to gaining power at each other's expense. See Bradley A. Thayer, "Creating Stability in New World Orders," Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago, August 1996. Also 
see Korina Kagan, "The Myth of the European Concert," Security Studies 7, No. 2 (Winter 1997-
98), pp. 1- 57. She concludes that the Concert of Europe "was a weak and ineffective institution 
that was largely irrel evant to great power behavior" (p. 3). 
46. See Melvyn P. Leffler, A Preponderance of Power: National Security, the Truman 
Administration, and the Cold War (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1992). 
47. For a discussion of American efforts to undermine Soviet control of Eastern Europe, see 
Peter Grose, Operation Roll back: America's Secret War behind the Iron Curtain (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 2000); Walter L. Hixson, Parting the Curtain: Propaganda, Culture, and the 
Cold War, 1945 -1961 (New York: St. Martin's, 1997); and Gregory Mitrovich, Undermining the 
Kremlin: Ame rica's Strategy to Subvert the Soviet Bloc, 1947- 1956 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2000). 
48. For a synoptic discussion of U.S. policy toward the Soviet Union in the late 1980s that 
cites most of the key sources on the subject, see Randall L. Schweller and William C. Wohlforth, 
"Power Test: Evaluating Realism in Response to the End of the Cold War," Security Studies 9, 
No. 3 (Spring 2000), pp. 91- 97. 
49. The editors of a major book on the Treaty of Versailles write, "The resulting reappraisal, 
as documented in this book, constitutes a new synthesis of peace conference scholarship. The 
findings call attention to divergent peace aims within the American and Allied camps and 
underscore the degree to which the negotiators themselves considered the Vers ailles Treaty a 
work in progress." Manfred F. Boemeke, Gerald D. Feldman, and Elisabeth Glaser, eds., The 
Treaty of Versailles: A Reassessment after 75 Years (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1998), p. 1. 
50. This paragraph draws heavily on Trachtenberg, Constructed Peace; and Marc 
Trachtenberg, History and Strategy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991), chaps. 4-
5. Also see G. John Ikenberry, "Rethinking the Origins of American Hegemony," Political 
Science Quarterly 104, No. 3 (Autumn 1989), pp. 375 -400. 
51. The failure of American policymakers during the early Cold War to under stand where the 
security competition in Europe was leading is summarized by Trachtenberg, who asks the 
rhetorical question, "Had anyone predicted that a sys tem of this sort would emerge, and that it 
would provide the basis for a very durable peace?" His answer: "The predictions that were 
made pointed as a rule in the oppo site direction: that Germany could not be kept down forever; 
that the Federal Republic woul d ultimately . . . want nuclear forces of her own; that U.S. troops 
could not be expected to remain in ... Europe. . . . Yet all these predictions — every single one 
— turned out to be wrong." Trachtenberg, History and Strategy, pp. 23 1 -32. Also see 
Trach tenberg, Constructed Peace, pp. vii -viii. 
52. For more discussion of the pitfalls of collective security, see John J. Mearsheimer, "The 
False Promise of International Institutions," International Security 19, No. 3 (Winter 1994- 95), 
pp. 26 -37. 
53. See Grieco, "Anarchy and the Limits of Cooperation," pp. 498, 500. 
54. For evidence of relative gains considerations thwarting cooperation among states, see 
Paul W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European Politics, 1763 -1848 (Oxford: Clarendon, 
1994), chap. 3. 
55. Charles Lipson, "International Cooperation in Economic and Security Affairs," World 
Politics 37, No. 1 (October 1984), p. 14. 
56. See Randall L. Schweller, "Bandwagoning for Profit: Bringing the Revisionist State Back 
In," International Security 19, No. 1 (Summer 1994), pp. 72- 107. See also the works cited in 
note 59 in this chapter. 
57. See Misha Glenny, The Fall of Yugoslavia: The Third Balkan War, 3d rev. ed. (New 
York: Penguin, 1996), p. 149; Philip Sherwell and Alina Petric, "Tudjman Tapes Reveal Pl ans to 
Divide Bosnia and Hide War Crimes," Sunday Telegraph (London), June 18, 2000; Laura Silber 
and Allan Little, Yugoslavia: Death of a Nation, rev. ed. (New York: Penguin, 1997), pp. ,131 -32, 
213; and Warren Zimmerman, Origins of a Catastrophe: Yugoslavia and Its Destroyers — 
America 's Last Ambassador Tells What Happened and Why (New York: Times Books, 1996), 
pp. 116 -17. 
58. See John Maynard Keynes, The Economic Consequences of the Peace (New York: 
Penguin, 1988), chap. 2; and J. M. Roberts, Europe, 1880 -1945 (London: Longman, 1970), pp. 
239-41. 
59. For information on the Molotov -Ribbentrop Pact of August 1939 and the ensuing 
cooperation between those states, see Alan Bullock, Hitler and Stalin: Parallel Lives (London: 
HarperCollins, 1991), chaps. 14 -15; I.C.B. Dear, ed., The Oxford Companion to World War II 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995), pp. 780 -82; Anthony Read and David Fisher, The 
Deadly Embrace: Hitler, Stalin, and the Nazi -Soviet Pact, 1939- 1941 (New York: Norton, 1988); 
Geoffrey Roberts, The Unholy Alliance: Stalin's Pact with Hitler (Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1989), chaps. 8- 10; and Adam B. Ulam, Expansion and Coexistence: Soviet Foreign 
Policy, 1917- 1973, 2d ed. (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1974), chap. 6. 
60. Waltz maintains that structural theories can explain international out comes —i.e., 
whether war is more likely in bipolar or multipolar systems —but that they cannot explain the 
foreign policy behavior of particular states. A separate the ory of foreign policy, he argues, is 
needed for that task. See Theory of International Politics, pp. 71- 72, 12.1 -23. Colin Elman 
challenges Waltz on this point, arguing that there is no logical reason why systemic theories 
cannot be used as a theory of for eign policy. T he key issue, as Elman notes, is whether the 
particular structural the ory helps us understand the foreign policy decisions that states make. I 
will attempt to show that offensive realism can be used to explain both the foreign policy of indi -
vidual states and international outcomes. See Colin Elman, "Horses for Courses: Why Not 
Neorealist Theories of Foreign Policy?"; Kenneth N. Waltz, "International Politics Is Not Foreign Policy"; and Colin Elman, "Cause, Effect, and Consistency: A Response to Kenneth Wa ltz," in 
Security Studies 6, No. 1 (Autumn 1996), pp. 7 -61. 
 
CHAPTER FOUR 
 
1. Alfred T. Mahan, The Influence of Sea Power upon History, 1660 -1783, 12th ed. (Boston: 
Little, Brown, 1918). 
2. Giulio Douhet, The Command of the Air, trans. Dino Ferrari (New York: Coward- McCann, 
1942). 
3. This is not to deny that the United States and its allies maintained formidable ground 
forces in Europe during most of the Cold War, which is why the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) stood a good chance of thwarting a Soviet con ventional attack. See John 
J. Mearsheimer, "Why the Soviets Can't Win Quickly in Central Europe," International 
Security1', No. 1 (Summer 1982), pp. 3- 39; and Barry R. Posen, "Measuring the European 
Conventional Balance: Coping with Complexity in Threat Assessment," International Security 9, No. 3 (Winter 1984—85), pp. 47- 88. Nevertheless, unlike the Soviet army, the U.S. army was 
never in a posi tion to overrun Europe. In fact, it was probably only the third most powerful 
standing army on the c ontinent, behind the Soviet and West German armies. On or near the 
central front of the Cold War were roughly 26 Soviet divisions, 12 West German divisions, and 
slightly fewer than 6 American divisions. U.S. divisions, however, were bigger and more 
formidable than their West German and Soviet counterparts. But even allowing for these 
differences, the American army was still the third most powerful fighting force in Europe. 
Regarding the relative combat potential of American, West German, and Soviet divisions, see 
William P. Mako, U.S. Ground Forces and the Defense of Central Europe (Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution Press, 1983), pp. 105 -25. 
4. And marines are essentially small armies that go by a different name. 
5. Julian S. Corbett, Some Principles of Maritime Strategy (1911; rpt, Annapolis, MD: U.S. 
Naval Institute Press, 1988), p. 16. Corbett also writes that "it scarcely needs saying that it is 
almost impossible that a war can be decided by naval action alone" (p. 15). 
6. See John J. Mearsheimer, Con ventional Deterrence (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1983), esp. chap. 2. 
7. On command of the sea, see Corbett, Principles of Maritime Strategy, pp. 91 -106. For a 
good primer on naval strategy, see Geoffrey Till et al., Maritime Strategy and the Nuclear Age (New York: St. Martin's, 1982). 
8. States also aim to command the sea and the air so they can protect their own homeland 
from attack by the enemy. 
9. Not surprisingly, Mahan, who was a staunch advocate of independent naval power, 
disliked amphibi ous operations, which required the navy to support the army. See Jon T. 
Sumida, Inventing Grand Strategy: The Classic Works of Alfred Thayer Mahan Reconsidered 
(Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997), p. 45. 
10. This distinction between amphi bious assaults and amphibious landings is taken from 
Jeter A. Isely and Philip A. Growl, The U.S. Marines and Amphibious War: Its Theory and Its 
Practice in the Pacific (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1951), p. 8, although I define 
the concepts somewhat differently than they do. 
11. Raids are a fourth kind of amphibious operation. Raids are where a navy briefly places 
troops on an enemy's coast to destroy particular targets but then takes them back to sea when the mission is completed (or fails) . The disastrous Allied landing along the French coast at 
Dieppe in August 1942 is an example of a raid. See Brian L. Villa, Unauthorized Action: 
Mountbatten and the Dieppe Raid (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990). Another example is 
the British operat ion at Zeebrugge in April 1918. See Paul G. Halpern, A Naval History of World 
War I (Annapolis, MD: U.S. Naval Institute Press, 1994), pp. 411- 16.1 largely ignore raids, not 
because they usually fail, but because they are trivial operations that have lit tle influence on the 
outcomes of wars. 
12. Richard Harding, Amphibious Warfare in the Eighteenth Century: The British Expedition 
to the West Indies, 1740 -1742 (Woodbridge, UK: Boydell, 1991), p. 81. 
13. Quoted in Brian R. Sullivan, "Mahan's Blindness and Br illiance," Joint Forces Quarterly, 
No. 21 (Spring 1999), p. 116. 
14. John Lehman, who was secretary of the navy in the administration of President Ronald 
Reagan, frequently asserted that, in the event of war with the Soviet Union, American aircraft carrier s would move close to the Soviet mainland, specifically the Kola Peninsula, and strike 
important military targets. But hardly an admiral could be found to support that idea. Adm. Stansfield Turner wrote that Lehman "advocates a strategy for the Navy of 'maneuver, initiative, 
and offense.' Presumably, he is reaffirming his many public statements that our Navy is going to 
be capable of carrying the war right to.the Soviets' home bases and airfields. This sounds 
stirring and patriotic. The only problem is that I have yet to find one admi ral who believes that 
the U.S. Navy would even attempt it." Letter to the editor, Foreign Affairs 61, No. 2 (Winter 
1982- 83), p. 457. Submarines, however, can now deliver conventionally armed cruise missiles 
to a rival's homeland with relative impunity. See Owen R. Cote, Jr., Precision Strike from the Sea: New Missions for a New Navy, Security Studies Program Conference Report (Cambridge: MIT, July 1998); and Owen R. Cote, Jr., Mobile Targets from under the Sea: New Submarine 
Missions in the New Security Environment, Security Studies Program Conference Report 
(Cambridge: MIT, April 2000).' 
15. Quoted in Paul M. Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of British Naval Mastery (London: Alien 
Lane, 1976), p. 253. Also see Sumida, Inventing Grand Strategy, pp. 45- 47; and Allan Westcott, 
Mahan on Naval Warfare: Selections from the Writings of Rear Admiral Alfred T. Mahan 
(London: Sampson Low, Marston, 1919), pp. 91- 99, 328-41. For Corbett's views on blockade, 
see Principles of Maritime Strategy, pp . 95-102, 183- 208. Although Mahan believed that 
independent sea power, not land power, was the decisive military instrument, it is widely 
recognized that there are fatal flaws in his analysis. See Philip A. Growl, "Alfred Thayer Mahan: 
The Naval Historian, " in Peter Paret, ed., Makers of Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to the 
Nuclear Age (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986), pp. 444 -77; Gerald S. Graham, 
The Politics of Naval Supremacy: Studies in British Maritime Ascendancy (Cambridge: 
Cambr idge University Press, 1965); andKennedy, British Naval Mastery, esp. introduction and 
chap. 7. 
16. Two other cases rarely mentioned in the literature on blockade but that might be 
included in this list are Germany's efforts in World Wars I and II to use i ts geographic advantage 
and its navy to stop Russian/Soviet trade with the outside world. I did not include these cases, 
however, because Germany made only a minor effort to isolate Russia in both conflicts. 
Nevertheless, the German blockades had little ef fect on the outcome of either war, and thus 
they support my argument about the limited utility of independent sea power. 
17. Among the best sources on the Continental System are Geoffrey Bills, Napoleon's 
Continental Blockade: The Case of Alsace (Oxford: C larendon, 1981); Eli F. Heckscher, The 
Continental System: An Economic Interpretation, trans. C. S. Fearenside (Oxford: Clarendon, 1922); Georges Lefebvre, Napoleon, vol. 2, From Tilsit to Waterloo, 1807 -1815, trans. J. E. 
Anderson (New York: Columbia Univ ersity Press, 1990), chap. 4; and Mancur Olson, Jr., The 
Economics of the Wartime Shortage: A History of British Food Supplies in the Napoleonic War 
and in World Wars I and II (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1963), chap. 3. 
18. Concerning the United Ki ngdom's blockade of France between 1792 and 1815, see 
Francois Crouzet, "Wars, Blockade, and Economic Change in Europe, 1792- 1815," Journal of 
Economic History 24, No. 4 (December 1964), pp. 567- 90; Kennedy, British Naval Mastery, 
chap. 5; and Herbert W. R ichmond, Statesmen and Seapower (Oxford: Clarendon, 1946), pp. 
170-257. In its various wars with France during the eighteenth century, the United Kingdom tried 
to bring its rival to its knees by cutting French overseas commerce. See Graham, Politics of 
Naval Supremacy, pp. 19- 20. But as Graham notes, "There is no evidence to suggest that the 
denial of colonial commerce materially altered the French strategic position on the Continent" (p. 
19). Also see Michael Howard, The British Way in Warfare: A Reapprais al, 1974 Neale Lecture 
in English History (London: Jonathan Cape, 1975), pp. 15 -20. 
19. Regarding the French blockade of Prussia, see Michael Howard, The Franco- Prussian 
War: The German Invasion of France, 1870 -1871 (London: Dorset Press, 1961), pp. 74- 76; and 
Theodore Ropp, The Development of a Modern Navy: French Naval Policy, 1871 -1904, ed. 
Stephen S. Roberts (Annapolis, MD: U.S. Naval Institute Press, 1987), pp. 22- 25. 
20. Some of the best sources on Germany's blockade of Britain in World War I are Olson, 
Economics of the Wartime Shortage, chap. 4; E. B. Potter and Chester W. Nimitz, Sea Power: A 
Naval History (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice -Hall, 1960), chap. 25; John Terraine, The U -Boat 
Wars, 1916 -1945 (New York : Putnam, 1989), part 1; and V. E. Tarrant, The U -Boat Offensive, 
1914- 1945 (Annapolis, MD: U.S. Naval Institute Press, 1989), pp. 7 -76. 
21. On the Allied blockade of Germany and Austria in World War I, see A. C. Bell, A History 
of the Blockade of Germany, Austria -Hungary, Bulgaria, and Turkey, 1914- 1918 (1937; rpt., 
London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1961); Louis Guichard, The Naval Blockade, 1914 -
1918, trans. Christopher R. Turner (New York: Appleton, 1930); Holger H. Herwig, The First 
World War: Germany and Austria- Hungary, 1914 -1918 (London: Arnold, 1997), pp. 271- 83; and 
C. Paul Vincent, The Politics of Hunger: The Allied Blockade of Germany, 1915- 1919 (Athens: 
Ohio University Press, 1985). Also see Avner Offer, The First World War: An Agrarian 
Interpretation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989), pp. 23- 78, which provides a detailed 
description of the effects of the blockade but ascribes too much importance to its impact on the 
war's outcome. 
22. On Germany's blockade of the United Kindom in Wor ld War II, see Clay Blair, Hitler's U-
Boat War: The Hunters, 1939- 1942 (New York: Random House, 1996); Clay Blair, Hitler's U-
Boat War: The Hunted, 1942- 1945 (New York: Random House, 1998); Jurgen Rohwer, "The U -
Boat War against the Allied Supply Lines," i n H. A. Jacobsen and J. Rohwer, eds., Decisive 
Battles of World War H: The German View, trans. Edward Fitzgerald (New York: Putnam, 1965), 
pp. 259 -312; Tarrant, U-Boat Offensive, pp. 81- 144; and Terraine, U-Boat Wars, pt. 3. 
23. For discussions of the Alli ed blockade of Germany and Italy in World War II, see 
Kennedy, British Naval Mastery, chap. 11; W. N. Medlicott, The Economic Blockade, 2 vols. 
(London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1952, 1959); and Alan S. Milward, War, Economy, 
and Society, 1939 -1945 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979), chap. 9. 
24. On the American Civil War, see Bern Anderson, By Sea and by River: The Naval History 
of the Civil War (New York: De Capo, 1989), pp. 26, 34 -37, 65- 66, 225 -34; Richard E. Beringer 
et al, Why th e South Lost the Civil War (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1986), chap. 3; 
and Potter and Nimitz, Sea Power, chaps. 13 -17. 
25. Among the best sources on the American blockade of Japan are Clay Blair, Silent 
Victory: The U.S. Submarine War against Japan (New York: Lippincott, 1975); U.S. Strategic 
Bombing Survey (USSBS), The War against Japanese Transportation, 1941- 1945, Pacific War 
Report 54 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1947); and Theodore Roscoe, 
United States Submarine Operations in World War II (Annapolis, MD: U.S. Naval Institute Press, 
1956). 
26. My analysis of Japan's decision to surrender relies heavily on Robert A. Pape, Bombing 
to Win: Air Power and Coercion in War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univ ersity Press, 1996), chap. 4, 
although I assign greater importance than Pape does to the dropping of the two atomic bombs. I 
also relied in part on Barton J. Bernstein, "Compelling Japan's Surrender without the A -bomb, 
Soviet Entry, or Invasion: Reconsider ing the US Bombing Survey's Early -Surrender 
Conclusions," Journal of Strategic Studies 18, No. 2 (June 1995), pp. 101- 48; Richard B. Frank, 
Downfall: The End of the Imperial Japanese Empire (New York: Random House, 1999); and Leon V. Sigal, Fighting to a Finish: The Politics of War Termination in the United States and 
Japan, 1945 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988). 
27. See Olson, Economics of the Wartime Shortage. Also see L. Margaret Barnett, British 
Food Policy during the First World War (Boston : Alien and Unwin, 1985); Gerd Hardach, The 
First World War, 1914- 1918 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977), chap. 5; and 
Milward, War, Economy, and Society, chap. 8. 
28. See Milward, War, Economy, and Society, p. 179. 
29. The quotations in thi s and the next paragraph are from pp. 132- 33 and 142 of Olson, 
Economics of the- Wartime Shortage. 
30. Pape, Bombing to Win, pp. 21 -27. 
31. Pape, Bombing to Win, p. 25. 
32. See Pape, Bombing to Win, chap. 4; and USSBS, The Effects of Strategic Bombing on 
Japanese Morale, Pacific War Report 14 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 
June 1947). 
33. On this basic logic, see Hein E. Goemans, War and Punishment: The Causes of War 
Termination and the First World War (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000). 
34. See Wesley F. Craven and James L. Gate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, 1 vols. 
(Washington, DC: Office of Air Force History, 1983), Vol. 2, pp. 681 -87, 695- 714; Thomas M. 
Coffey, Decision over Schweinfurt: The U.S. 8th Air Force Bat tle for Daylight Bombing (New 
York: David McKay, 1977); and John Sweetman, Schweinfurt: Disaster in the Skies (New York: 
Ballantine, 1971). 
35. See Trevor N. Dupuy, Elusive Victory: The Arab- Israeli Wars, 1947- 1974 (New York: 
Harper and Row, 1978), pp. 550 -53, 555- 56; Insight Team of the London Sunday Times, The 
Yom Kippur War (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1974), pp. 184- 89; Chaim Herzog, The War of 
Atonement, October 1973 (Boston: Little, Brown, 1975), pp. 256- 61; Edward Luttwak and Dan 
Horowitz, The Israel i Army (London: Alien Lane, 1975), pp. 347- 52, 374; and Eliezer Cohen, 
Israel's Best Defense: The First Full Story of the Israeli Air Force, trans. Jonathan Cordis (New 
York: Orion, 1993), pp. 321- 68, 386, 391. 
36. The line between interdiction operations that reach far behind an adver sary's front lines 
(deep interdiction) and strategic bombing is sometimes murky. Air forces can also help navies 
implement a blockade. 
37. Carl H. Builder, The Icarus Syndrome: The Role of Air Power Theory in the Evolution 
and Fate of the U.S. Air Force (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 1994), pas sim; Morton H. 
Halperin, Bureaucratic Politics and Foreign Policy (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 
1974), pp. 28- 32, 43 -46, 52; and Perry M. Smith, The Air Force Plans for Peace, 1943 -1945 
(Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1970), chaps. 1 -3. 
38. There are two main differences between blockade and strategic bombing. First, 
blockades are indiscriminate in the sense that they aim to cut off all of an enemy's imports and 
exports. Strategic bombers, as noted earlier, can be employed more selectively: they can 
strike'directly at specific industries and ignore others. Second, if the aim is to punish an 
adversary's civilian population, blockades can do that only indir ectly by wrecking the enemy's 
economy, which would eventually hurt the civilian population. Airpower, on the other hand, can 
perform that task directly by targeting civilians. 
39. See, for example, John A. Warden III, "Employing Air Power in.the Twenty -first Century," 
in Richard H. Schultz, Jr., and Robert L. Pfaltzgraff, Jr., eds., The Future of Air Power in the 
Aftermath of the Gulf War (Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: Air University Press, July 1992), pp. 57 -
82. 
40. For an interesting discussion of how the s trategic bombing mission has changed since 
1945, see Mark J. Conversino, "The Changed Nature of Strategic Attack," Parameters 27, No. 4 
(Winter 1997 -98), pp. 28 -41. Also see Phillip S. Meilinger, "The Problem with Our Airpower 
Doctrine," Airpower Journal 6, No. 1 (Spring 1992), pp. 24- 31. 
41. On World War I, see H. A. Jones, The War in the Air, vol. 3 (Oxford: Clarendon, 1931), 
chaps. 2 -3; H. A. Jones, The War in the Air, vol. 5 (Oxford: Clarendon, 1935), chaps. 1- 2; and 
George H. Quester, Deterrence before Hiroshima: The Airpower Background of Modern 
Strategy (New York: John Wiley, 1966), chap. 3. The Allies mounted a minor bombing campaign 
against Germany late in World War I, but it was of no strategic consequence. See H. A. Jones, 
The War in The Air, vol. 6 (Oxford: Clarendon, 1937), chaps. 1- 4; and Quester, Deterrence 
before Hiroshima, chap. 4. On World War II, see Matthew Cooper, The German Air Force, 
1933- 1945: An Anatomy of Failure (London: Jane's, 1981), chaps. 5 -6; and John Terraine, The 
Right of the Line: The Royal Air Force in the European War, 1939- 1945 (London: Hodder and 
Stoughton, 1985), chaps. 16 -25, 77. 
42. Richard J. Overy, Why the Allies Won (New York: Norton, 1996), p. 124. 
43. See Paul Kecskemeti, Strategic Surrender: The Politics of Victory and Defeat (Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press, 1958), pp. 72 -73; Barrie Pitt, The Crucible of War: Western 
Desert 1941 (London: Jonathan Cape, 1980), passim; and Jonathan Steinberg, All or Nothing: 
The Axis and the Holocaust, 1941- 1943 (New York: Routledge, 1990), pp. 15- 25. 
44. These figures are from Pape, Bombing to Win, pp. 254 -55. In addition to Pape (chap. 8), 
see Craven and Gate, Army Air Forces, vol. 3, chaps. 20 -22; Max Hastings, Bomber Command 
(New York: Touchstone, 1989); Ronald Schaffer, Wings of Judgement: American Bombing in 
World War II (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985), chaps. 4- 5; and Charles Webster and 
Noble Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive against Germany, 1939- 1945, vols. 1-4 (London: 
Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1961). 
45. See Earl R. Beck, Under the Bombs: The German Home Front, 1942 -1945 (Lexington: 
University Press of Kentucky, 1986). 
46. See Craven and Gate, Army Air Forces, vol. 2, sec. 4, and vol. 3, sees. 1, 2, 4 -6; 
Haywood S. Hansell, Jr., The Strategic Air War against Germany and Japan: A Memoir (Washington, DC: Office of Air Force History, 1986), chaps. 2- 3; Alfred C. Mierzejewski, The 
Collapse of the German War Economy, 1944 -1945: Allied Air Power and the German National 
Railway (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1988); and USSBS, The Effects of 
Strategic Bombing on the German War Economy, European War Report 3 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Off ice, October 1945). 
47. Overy emphasizes that the air war played a key role in defeating Nazi Germany by 
forcing Hitler to divert precious resources away from the ground war against the Allies and especially the Red Army. See Overy, Why the Allies Won, pp. 20, 127 -33. The Allies, however, 
also had to divert enormous resources away from the ground war to the air war. See General 
Marshall's Report: The Winning of the War in Europe and the Pacific, Biennial Report of the 
Chief of Staff of the United States Arm y to the Secretary of War, July 1, 1943, to June 30, 1945 
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1945), pp. 101 -7. There is no evidence that the Allies diverted 
fewer resources to fighting the air war than did the Germans. In fact, I believe a convinc ing case 
can be made that the Allies diverted greater resources to the air war than did the Germans. 
48. Craven and Gate, Army Air Forces, vol. 2, chaps. 13 -17; Kecskemeti, Strategic 
Surrender, chap. 4; Pape, Bombing to Win, pp. 344 -45; Philip A. Smith, "Bombing to Surrender: 
The Contribution of Air Power to the Collapse of Italy, 1943," thesis, School of Advanced 
Airpower Studies, Air University, Maxwell Air Force Base, AL, March 1997; and Peter Tompkins, 
Italy Betrayed (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1966). 
49. The Al lied air forces compounded the Italian army's problems with an interdiction 
campaign against the transportation network that supported its front line forces. 
50. See Craven and Gate, Army Air Forces, vol. 5, pp. 507 -614; Hansell, Strategic Air War, 
chaps. 4-6; and Schaffer, Wings of Judgement, chap. 6. 
51. See Martin Caidin, A Torch to the Enemy: The Fire Raid on Tokyo (New York: 
Ballantine, 1960); Craven and Cate, Army Air Forces, Vol. 5, chaps. 1 -5, 17 -23; Schaffer, Wings 
of Judgement, chaps. 6- 8; and Kenneth P. Werrell, Blankets of Fire: U.S. Bombers over Japan 
during World War II (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1996). 
52. The U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey reports that the entire air campaign (conventional 
and nuclear) destroyed about 43 percent of Japan's 66 largest cities, killed roughly 900,000 
civilians, and forced the evacuation of more than 8.5 mil lion people from urban areas. USSBS, 
Japanese Morale, pp. 1- 2. Two of those 66 cities (Hiroshima and Nagasaki) were destroyed by 
atomic bombs, not conventional attacks. Moreover, a total of about 115,000 civilians died in the 
two nuclear attacks. Pape, Bombing to Win, p. 105. The firebombing also hurt the Japanese 
economy somewhat, although the blockade had effectively devastated it by the time the 
bombers began torching Japan's cities. 
53. Angelo Del Boca, The Ethiopian War, 1935- 1941, trans. P. D. Cummins (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1969); J.F.C. Fuller, The First of the League Wars: Its Lessons and Omens (London: Eyre and Spott iswoode, 1936); and Thomas M. Coffey, Lion by the Tail: The 
Story of the Italian- Ethiopian War (London: Hamish Hamilton, 1974). 
54. Takejiro Shiba, "Air Operations in the China Area, July 1937- August 1945," in Donald S. 
Detwiler and Charles B. Burdick, eds ., War in Asia and the Pacific, 1937 -1949, Vol. 9 (New 
York: Garland, 1980), pp. 1 -220; and H. J. Timperley, ed., Japanese Terror in China (New York: 
Modern Age, 1938), chaps. 6 -7. 
55. Mark Clodfelter, The Limits of Air Power: The American Bombing of North Vietnam (New 
York: Free Press, 1989), chaps. 2- 4; and Pape, Bombing to Win, pp. 176 -95. 
56. Scott R. McMichael, Stumbling Bear: Soviet Military Performance in Afghanistan 
(London: Brassey's, 1991), chap. 9; Denny R. Nelson, "Soviet Air Power: Tactics and Weapons 
Used in Afghanistan," Air University Review, January -February 1985, pp. 31- 44; Marek 
Sliwinski, "Afghanistan: The Decimation of a People," Orbis 33, No. 1 (Winter 1989), pp. 39 -56; 
and Edward B. Westermann, "The Limits of Soviet Airpower: The Bear versus the Mujahideen in Afghanistan, 1979- 1989," thesis, School of Advanced Airpower Studies, Air University, Maxwell 
Air Force Base, AL, June 1997. 
57. Eliot A. Cohen et al., Gulf War Air Power Survey, 5 vols. (Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Of fice, 1993); and Pape, Bombing to Win, chap. 7. The strategic bombing 
campaign was directed at targets in Iraq such as the city of Baghdad and is distinct from the air 
attacks directed against Iraqi military targets in Kuwait. The latter campaign inflicted heavy 
losses on Iraq's army and helped the Allied ground forces win a quick and decisive victory in 
late February 1991. 
58. The U.S. air force's own study of its attacks on Iraqi leadership targets con cludes, "The 
results of these attacks clearly fell short of fulfilling the ambitious hope, entertained by at least 
some airmen, that bombing the L [leadership] and CCC [command, control, and 
communications] target categories might put enough pres sure on the regime to bring about its 
overthrow and completely sever communications between the leaders in Baghdad and their 
military forces." Thomas A. Keaney and Eliot A. Cohen, Gulf War Air Power Survey Summary 
Report (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1993), p. 70. Also see Pape, 
Bombing to Win, pp. 221 -23, 226- 40, 250 -53. 
, 59. Alien F. Chew, The White Death: The Epic of the Soviet -Finnish Winter War (East 
Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1971), chap. 5; Eloise Engle and Lauri Paananen, 
The Winter War: The Russo- Finnish Conflict, 1939- 40 (New York: Scribner's, 1973), chaps. 3, 7, 
8; and William R. Trotter, A Frozen Hell: The Russo- Finnish Winter War of1939- 1940 (Chapel 
Hill, NC: Algonquin, 1991), chap. 15. 
60. The best analysis of this case is Pape, Bombing to Win, chap. 5. For detailed 
descriptions of the bombing campaign, see Conrad C. Crane, American Airpower Strategy in Korea, 1950 -1953 (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2000); and Robert F. Futrell, The 
United States Air Force in Korea, 1950 -1953, rev. ed. (Washington, DC: Office o f Air Force 
History, 1983). 
61. Clodfelter, Limits of Air Power, chaps. 5 -6; Pape, Bombing to Win, pp. 195 -210. 
62. John. E. Mueller, "The Search for the 'Breaking Point' in Vietnam: The Statistics of a 
Deadly Quarrel," International Studies Quarterly 24, No. 4 (December 1980), pp. 497- 519. 
63. The best available description of the air campaign over Kosovo is the U.S. air force's 
official study of the offensive. See The Air War over Serbia: Aerospace Power in Operation 
Allied Force, Initial Report (Washington, DC: U.S. Air Force, 2001). NATO air forces also 
attacked Yugoslav ground troops in Bosnia during the late summer of 1995, but that was not a 
strategic bombing campaign. See Robert C. Owen, ed., Deliberate Force: A Case Study in 
Effective Air Campaigning (Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: Air University Press, January 2000). 
64. The best available sources include Daniel A. Byman and Matthew C. Waxman, "Kosovo 
and the Great Air Power Debate," International Security 24, No. 4 (Spring 2000), pp. 5 -38; Ivo 
H. Daalder and Michael E. O'Hanlon, Winning Ugly: NATO's War to Save Kosovo (Washington, 
DC: Blockings Institution Press, 2000); Doyle McManus, "Clinton's Massive Ground Invasion That Almost Was; Yugoslavia: After 71 Days of Air War, White House Had in Place a Memo to 
Send in 175,000 NATO Troops," Los Angeles Times, June 9, 2000; and Barry R. Posen, "The 
War for Kosovo: Serbia's Political -Military Strategy," International Security 24, No. 4 (Spring 
2000), pp. 39- 84. 
65. William H. Arkin, "S mart Bombs, Dumb Targeting?" Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 56, 
No. 3 (May -June 2000), p. 49. The Yugoslav government claims that the number of civilians 
killed was 2,000. See Posen, "War for Kosovo," p. 81. 
66. Pape, Bombing to Win, p. 68. For a discus sion of why punishment from the air usually 
fails, see ibid., pp. 21- 27; Stephen T. Hosmer, Psychological Effects of U.S. Air Operations in 
Four Wars, 1941 -1991: Lessons for U.S. Commanders, RAND Report MR -576-AF (Santa 
Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1996); and Irving L. Janis, Air War and Emotional Stress: 
Psychological Studies of Bombing and Civilian Defense (New York: McGraw -Hill, 1951). 
67. There is also some evidence in the public domain that a decapitation strat egy was 
employed against Yugoslavia in 1999. Specifically, it appears from some of the targets that NATO struck (TV stations, Milosevic's house, important government buildings, party 
headquarters, high -level military headquarters, and the businesses of Milosevic's close friends) 
that it aimed ei ther to kill him or to precipitate a coup. There is no evidence, however, that this 
strategy worked. 
68. See Pape, Bombing to Win, pp. 79- 86. 
69. See Beck, Under the Bombs; Jeffrey Herf, Divided Memory: The Nazi Past in the Two 
Germanys (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997); and lan Kershaw, The 'Hitler 
Myth': Image and Reality in the Third Reich (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987). 
70. On this general theme, see Kennedy, British Naval Mastery, chap. 7; Robert W. Komer, 
Maritime Strategy or Coalition Defense (Cambridge, MA: Abt Books, 1984); Halford J. 
Mackinder, "The Geographical Pivot of History," Geographical Journal 23, No. 4 (April 1904), 
pp. 421 -37; Halford J. Mackinder, Democratic Ideals and Reality: A Study in the Pol itics of 
Reconstruction (New York: Henry Holt, 1919); and Martin Wight, Power Politics, eds. Hedley 
Bull and Carsten Holbraad (New York: Holmes and Meier, 1978), chap. 6. 
71. Corbett says of the Battle of Trafalgar, "By universal assent Trafalgar is ranked as one of 
the decisive battles of the world, and yet of all the great victories there is not one which to all 
appearance was so barren of immediate result. It had brought to a triumphant conclusion one of 
the most masterly and complex sea cam paigns in hi story, but insofar as it was an integral part 
of the combined campaign its results are scarcely to be discerned. It gave to England finally the 
dominion of the seas, but it left Napoleon dictator of the Continent. So incomprehensible was its 
apparent sterility that to fill the void a legend grew up that it saved England from invasion." Julian S. Corbett, The Campaign of Trafalgar (London: Longmans, Green, 1910), p. 408. Also 
see Edward Ingram, "Illusions of Victory: The Nile, Copenhagen, and Trafalgar Revisited," 
Military Affairs 48, No. 3 (July 1984), pp. 140- 43. 
72. I estima te that approximately 24 million Soviets died in the fight against Nazi Germany. 
Of that total, 16 million were civilian and 8 million were military. Of the 8 million military deaths, 
3.3 million were prisoners of war who died in cap tivity. The remaining 4.7 million died either in 
combat or from combat wounds. Among the best sources on Soviet casualties are Edwin 
Bacon, "Soviet Military Losses in World War II," Journal of Slavic Military Studies 6, No. 4 
(December 1993), pp. 613- 33; Michael Ellman and S. M aksudov, "Soviet Deaths in the Great 
Patriotic War: A Note," Europe- Asia Studies 46, No. 4 (1994), pp. 671- 80; Mark Harrison, 
Accounting for War: Soviet Production, Employment, and the Defence Burden, 1941 -1945 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996) , pp. 159 -61; and Gerhard Hirschf eld, ed., The 
Policies of Genocide: Jews and Soviet Prisoners of War in Nazi Germany (Boston: Alien and 
Unwin, 1986), chaps. 1 -2. For evidence that the ratio of German casualties between the eastern 
front and other fronts was probably greater than 3:1, see Jonathan R. Adelman, Prelude to the 
Cold War: The Tsarist, Soviet, and U.S. Armies in the Two World Wars (Boulder, CO: Lynne 
Rienner, 1988), pp. 128- 29, 171 -73; and David M. Glantz and Jonathan M. House, When Titans 
Clash ed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1995), p. 
284. 
73. See Lincoln Li, The Japanese Army in North China, 1937- 1941: Problems of Political 
and Economic Control (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1975). 
74. See Potter and Nimitz, Sea Power, chap. 19; and the works cited in Chapter 6, note 18 
of this book. 
75. The Reagan administration's "Maritime Strategy" contained some schemes for using the 
U.S. navy to influence events on the central front, but those opera tions were c oncerned mainly 
with shifting the strategic nuclear balance against the Soviet Union. Of course the U.S. navy 
was also concerned with maintaining com mand of the sea in wartime, so that it could transport 
troops and supplies across the Atlantic Ocean. See John J. Mearsheimer, "A Strategic Misstep: 
The Maritime Strategy and Deterrence in Europe," International Security 11, No. 2 (Fall 1986), 
pp. 3 -57; and Barry R. Posen, Inadvertent Escalation: Conventional War and Nuclear Risks 
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell Universi ty Press, 1991), chaps. 4 -5. 
76. This point is widely accepted by prominent naval strategists. For example, Adm. Herbert 
Richmond, one of Britain's leading naval thinkers in the first half of the twentieth century, wrote, "An invasion by sea of a great modern military state may be dismissed as impracticable, even if 
there were no opposition at sea. The number of men which can be transported would never be 
sufficient to conduct an invasion in the face of the opposition of the military forces of any great 
power." Herbert Richmond, Sea Power in the Modern World (London: G. Bell, 1934), p. 173. 
77. The problem of projecting power across a large body of water is not simply a problem of 
operating over a long distance. There is a fundamental difference between movi ng an army over 
water and moving it over land. A great power separated from an adversary by a large stretch of 
land can conquer and occupy that land and then move its army and air force right up to the 
border of its rival, where it can launch a massive gr ound invasion. (Consider how Napoleonic 
France conquered the various states that separated it from Russia in the early 1800s and then invaded Russia with a huge army in 1812.) Great powers, however, cannot conquer and occupy 
water. The sea, as Corbett notes, "is not susceptible to ownership. . . . [Y]ou cannot subsist your 
armed forces upon it as you can upon enemy's territory." Corbett, Principles of Maritime Strategy, p. 93. (Napoleon could not capture the English Channel and station troops on it, which 
explains in part why he did not invade the United Kingdom). Therefore, navies have to move 
armies across the sea to strike an adver sary. But navies usually cannot project large and 
powerful armies into enemy terri tory, and therefore the striking power of seaborne invasion 
forces is sharply limited. 
78. See Piers Mackesy, "Problems of an Amphibious Power: Britain against France, 1793-
1815," Naval War College Review 30, No. 4 (Spring 1978), pp. 18 -21. Also see Richard 
Harding, "Sailors and Gentlemen of Parade: Some Professional and Technical Problems 
Concerning the Conduct of Combined Operations in the Eighteenth Century," Historical Journal 
32, No. 1 (March 1989), pp. 35 -55; and Potter and Nimitz, Sea Power, p. 67. 
79. Raids, on the other hand, were commonpl ace in great -power wars during the age of sail. 
For example, Great Britain launched four raids against French port cities in 1778, during the Seven Years' War. See Potter and Nimitz, Sea Power, p. 53. Although Britain had a penchant 
for raids, they were of ten unsuccessful. Looking at Lisbon (1589), Cadiz (1595 and 1626), Brest 
(16-96), Toulon (1707), Lorient (1746), Rochefort (1757), and Walcheren (1809), Michael 
Howard sees "an almost unbroken record of expensive and humiliating failures." Howard, British 
Way in Warfare, p. 19. Even the successful raids, however, had little effect on the balance of 
power. 
80. For overviews of how industrialization affected navies, see Bernard Brodie, Sea Power 
in the Machine Age, 2d ed. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1943); Karl 
Lautenschlager, "Technology and the Evolution of Naval Watiaie," International Security &, No. 
2 (Fall 1983), pp. 3- 51; and Potter and Nimitz, Sea Power, chaps. 12, 18. 
81. Quoted in Brodie, Se a Power, p. 49. 
82. On the impact of railroads on war, see Arden Bucholz, Moltke, Schlieffen, and Prussian 
War Planning (New York: Berg, 1991); Edwin A. Pratt, The Rise of Rail- Power in War and 
Conquest, 1833- 1914 (London: P. S. King, 1915); Dennis E. Show alter, Railroads and Rifles: 
Soldiers, Technology, and the Unification of Germany (Hamden, CT: Archon, 1975); George 
Edgar Turner, Victory Rode the Rails: The Strategic Place of the Railroads in the Civil War 
(Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1992); and John Westwood, Railways at War (San 
Diego, CA: Howell- North, 1981). 
83. See Arthur Hezlet, Aircraft and Sea Power (New York: Stein and Day, 1970); and 
Norman Polmar, Aircraft Carriers: A Graphic History of Carrier Aviation and Its Influence on 
World Ev ents (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1969). 
84. See USSBS, Air Campaigns of the Pacific War, Pacific War Report 7la (Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, July 1947), sec. 10. 
85. I.C.B. Dear, ed., The Oxford Companion to World War II (Oxford: Oxfo rd University 
Press, 1995), pp. 46 -50. Also see B. B. Schofield, The Arctic Convoys (London: Macdonald and 
Jane's, 1977); and Richard Woodman, The Arctic Convoys, 1941 -1945 (London: John Murray, 
1994). 
86. On how submarines affect war, see Arthur Hezlet, T he Submarine and Sea Power 
(London: Peter Davies, 1967); and Karl Lautenschlager, "The Submarine in Naval Warfare, 
1901- 2001," International Security 11, No. 3 (Winter 1986 -87), pp. 94 -140. 
87. Halpern, Naval History of World War I, p. 48. 
88. For a general discussion of naval mines and how they affect the conduct of war, see 
Gregory K. Hartmann and Scott C. Truver, Weapons That Wait: Mine Warfare in the U.S. Navy, 
2d ed. (Annapolis, MD: U.S. Naval Institute Press, 1991). 
89. Hartmann and Truver, Weapons That Wait, p. 15. 
90. See U.S. Department of Defense, Conduct of the Persian Gulf War, Final Report to 
Congress (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, April 1992), chap. 7; and Michael 
R. Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor, The Generals' War: The Inside Story of the Conflict in the 
Gulf (Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 1995), pp. 292- 94, 343 -45, 368- 69. 
91. Describing British strategy against France during the Napoleonic Wars, Piers Mackesy 
writes, "No major landing in Western Europe could ever be contem plated unless there was an 
active war front in the east to hold down the major forces of the French. Mackesy, "Problems of an Amphibious Power," p. 21. 
92. Japan's attempt to transport troop reinforcements to the Philippines in late 1944, when 
the United States dominated the skies over the Pacific, illustrates what happens to one's 
seaborne forces when one does not have air superiority. American planes decima ted the 
Japanese convoys. See M. Hamlin Cannon, Leyte: The Return to the Philippines (Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1954), pp. 92- 102. Of course, the navy launching the 
seaborne forces must also have com mand of the sea. On the importanc e of sea control for 
amphibious operations, see P. H. Colomb, Naval Warfare: Its Ruling Principles and Practice Historically Treated (London: W. H. Alien, 1891), chaps. 11 -18. 
93. See Alfred Vagts, Landing Operations: Strategy, Psychology, Tactics, Politics, from 
Antiquity to 1945 (Harrisburg, PA: Military Service Publishing Company, 1946), pp. 509- 16; and 
Samuel R. Williamson, Jr., The Politics of Grand Strategy: Britain and France Prepare for War, 
1904- 1914 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1969), pp. 43 -45. 
94. Corbett, Principles of Maritime Strategy, p. 98. 
95. Quoted in Kennedy, British Naval Mastery, p. 201. 
96. See Mearsheimer, "A Strategic Misstep," pp. 25- 27. 
97. Describing American war plans for the period between 1945 and 1950, S teven Ross 
writes, "Early plans, therefore, called for a rapid retreat from Europe and contained no concept of a second Normandy. Against the might of the Red Army there was little or no prospect of 
success by direct attack." Steven Ross, American War Plans, 1945- 1950 (New York: Garland, 
1988), pp. 152- 53. 
98. See Piers Mackesy, Statesmen at War: The Strategy of Overthrow, 1798- 1799 (New 
York: Longman, 1974); and A. B. Rodger, The War of the Second Coalition, 1798 to 1801: A 
Strategic Commentary (Oxford: Cl arendon, 1964). 
99. See David Gates, The Spanish Ulcer: A History of the Peninsular War (New York: 
Norton, 1986), chaps. 5- 7; and Michael Glover, The Peninsular War, 1807 -1814: A Concise 
Military History (Hamden, CT: Archon, 1974), chaps. 4 -6. 
100. The United Kingdom kept a small contingent of troops in Portugal, which had regained 
its sovereignty in the wake of the British invasion. The British navy transported additional troops 
to friendly Portugal in April 1809, and those forces, under Lord Wellington 's command, played 
an important role in winning the war on the Iberian Peninsula. 
101. See Piers Mackesy, British Victory in Egypt, -1801: The End of Napoleon's Conquest 
(London: Routledge, 1995); Potter and Nimitz, Sea Power, chap. 7; and Rodger, War of th e 
Second Coalition, chaps. 1- 9, esp. chap. 16. Britain and France also conducted a handful of 
small- scale amphibious operations in the West Indies dur ing the French Revolutionary Wars. 
See Michael Duffy, Soldiers, Sugar, and Seapower: The British Expediti ons to the West Indies 
and the War against Revolutionary France (Oxford: Clarendon, 1987). 
102. Among the best works on the Crimean War are Winfried Baumgart, The Crimean War, 
1853- 1856 (London: Arnold, 1999); John S. Curtiss, Russia's Crimean War (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 1979); David M. Goldfrank, The Origins of the Crimean War (New York: 
Longman, 1994); Andrew D. Lambert, The Crimean War: British Grand Strategy, 1853- 1856 
(New York: Manchester University Press, 1990); Norman Rich, Why the Crimean War? A 
Cautionary Tale (Hanover, NH: University Press of New England, 1985); and Albert Seaton, The 
Crimean War: A Russian Chronicle (London: B. T. Batsford, 1977). 
103. The numbers in this paragraph are from Potter and Nimitz, Sea Power, p. 234; and 
Hew Strachan, "Soldiers, Strategy and Sebastopol," Historical Journal 21, No. 2 (June 1978), p. 
321. 
104. Quoted in Vagts, Landing Operations, p. 411. 
105. Among the best works on Gallipoli are C. F. Aspinall -Oglander, Military Operations: 
Gallipoli, 2 vols ., Official British History of World War I (London: Heinemann, 1929); Robert R. 
James, Gallipoli (London: B. T. Batsford, 1965); and Michael Hickey, Gallipoli (London: John 
Murray, 1995). Also, the Russians con ducted some small -scale amphibious operations against 
the Turks in the Black Sea region. See Halpern, Naval History of World War I, pp. 238- 46. 
106. Two other well -known amphibious operations in Europe were not direct ed against the 
territory of a great power. Germany invaded and conquered Norway (a minor power) in April 
1940, and American troops successfully launched seaborne assaults against French- controlled 
North Africa in November 1942. France, which was decisively defeated by Nazi Germany in the 
spring of 1940, was not a sovereign state, much less a great power, in 1942. On Norway, see 
Jack Adams, The Doomed Expedition: The Norwegian Campaign of 1940 (London: Leo Cooper, 
1989); and Maurice Harvey, Scandinavian Misadventure (Turnbridge Wells, UK: Spellmount, 
1990). On North Africa, see George F. H owe, Northwest Africa: Seizing the Initiative in the West 
(Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1991), pts. 1- 3. Furthermore, the Germans 
and especially the Soviets launched numerous small -scale amphibious oper ations into territory 
controlled by the other side on the shores of the Baltic and Black Seas. See W. I. Atschkassow, 
"Landing Operations of the Soviet Naval Fleet during World War Two," in Merrill L. Bartlett, ed., 
Assault from the Sea: Essays on the Hist ory of Amphibious Warfare (Annapolis, MD: U.S. Naval 
Institute Press, 1983), pp. 299 -307; and "Baltic Sea Operations," and "Black Sea Operations," in 
Dear, ed., Oxford Companion to World War II, pp. 106 -8, 135- 36. One study estimates that the 
Soviets conducted 113 amphibious invasions between 1941 and 1945. See Atschkassow, "Landing Operations," p. 299. Many failed, but more important, they were all minor operations 
that took place on the periphery of the main battlefront between the Wehrmacht and the Red 
Army. Consequently, they had little influence on the war's outcome. Finally, the Soviets 
launched two minor amphibious operations against Finnish- controlled territory in 1944, one of 
which failed. See Waldemar Erfurth, The Last Finnish War (Washington, DC: University 
Publications of America, 1979), p. 190. 
107. On Sicily, see Albert N. Garland and Howard M. Smyth, Sicily and the Surrender of 
Italy (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1965), chaps. 1- 10. On the Italian 
mainland, see Martin Blumenson, Salerno to Cassino (Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 1969), chaps. 1 -9. 
108. On Anzio, see Blumenson, Salerno to Cassino, chaps. 17- 18, 20, 22, 24. 
109. On Normandy, see Gordon A. Harrison, Cross -Channel Attack (Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1951). On southern France, see Jeffrey J. Clarke and Robert R. 
Smith, Riviera to the Rhine (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1993), chaps. 1-
7. 
110. Italy was technically still a great power when the Allies invaded Sicily in mid -1943, and 
Italian as well as German troops were located on that island. But as noted, the Italian army was 
in tatters and incapable of putting up a serious fight against the Allies. In fact, the Wehrmacht 
was largely responsible for Italy's defense at the time of the Sicily operation. Italy was out of the 
war when the Allies invaded the Italian mainland and Anzio} 
111. See Paul Kennedy, Pacific Onslaught: 7th December 1941- 7th February 1943 (New 
York: Ballantine, 1972); and H. P. Willmott, E mpires in the Balance: Japanese and Allied Pacific 
Strategies to April 1942 (Annapolis, MD: U. S. Naval Institute Press, 1982). 
112. Hezlet, Aircraft and Sea Power, chap. 8; Isely and Growl, U.S. Marines and 
Amphibious War, pp. 74, 79; and Hans G. Von Lehm ann, "Japanese Landing Operations in 
World War II," in Bartlett, ed., Assault from the Sea, pp. 195 -201. 
113. "Major U.S. Amphibious Operations —World War II, "memorandum, U.S. Army Center 
of Military History, Washington, DC, December 15, 1960. Each of the fifty-two invasion forces 
was at least the size of a regimental combat team. Operations involving smaller units are not 
included. Also, the Australian military conducted three amphibious operations against Japanese 
forces on Borneo between May and July 1945. These mopping- up campaigns succeeded for 
essentially the same reasons that the American seaborne invasions gained their objective. See 
Peter Dennis et al, The Oxford Companion to Australian Military History (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1995), pp. 109 -16. 
114. USSBS, Air Campaigns of the Pacific War, p. 19. 
115. Guadalcanal and the Philippines are major exceptions to this rule. See George W. 
Garand and Truman R. Strobridge, Western Pacific Operations: History of U.S. Marine Corps 
Operations in World War II, vol. 4 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1971), pp. 
320-21; and Isely and Growl, U.S. Marines and Amphibious War, p. 588. 
116. USSBS, Air Campaigns of the Pacific War, p. 61. 
117. Among the best general surveys of this conflict are Paul S. Dull, A Battle History of the 
Imperial Japanese Navy, 1941- 1945 (Annapolis, MD: U.S. Naval Institute Press, 1978); Isely 
and Growl, U.S. Marines and Amphibious War; Potter and Nimitz, Sea Power, chaps. 35- 43; 
and Ronald H. Spector, Eagle against the Sun: The American War with Japan (New York: Free 
Press, 1985). 
118. On the disparity in size between the Japanese and American economies, see Table 
6.2; Adelman, Prelude, pp. 139, 202 -3; and Jonathan R. Adelman, Revolution, Armies, and 
War: A Political History (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 1985), pp. 130 -31. 
119. By mid- 1945, there were about 2 million soldiers in Japan's home army. Dear, ed., 
Oxford Companion to World War II, p. 623. At the same time, there were roughly 900,000 
Japanese soldiers in China, 250,000 in Korea, 750,000 in Manchuria, and 600,000 in Southeast 
Asia. These numbers are from Adelman, Revolution, p. 147; Saburo Hayashi and Alvin D. Coox, 
Kogun: The Japanes e Army in the Pacific War (Quantico, VA: Marine Corps Association, 1959), 
p. 173; and Douglas J. MacEachin, The Final Months of the War with Japan: Signals Intelligence, U.S. Invasion Planning, and the A -Bomb Decision (Langley, VA: Center for the 
Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency, December 1998), attached document no. 4. 
120. Although the invading American forces would surely have conquered Japan, they 
undoubtedly would also have suffered significant casualties in the process. See Frank, 
Downfall; and MacEachin, Final Months. 
121. Insular powers, however, might be attacked over land by a rival great power if that 
adversary can deploy troops on the territory of a minor power in the insular state's backyard. As 
will be discussed in the next chapter, insular great pow ers worry about this possibility and seek 
to ensure that it never happens. 
122. See Frank J. McLynn, Invasion: From the Armada to Hitler, 1588 -1945 (London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1987); and Herbert W. Richmond, The Invasion of Britain: An 
Account of Plans, Attempts and Counter -measures from 1586 to 1918 (London: Methuen, 
1941). 
123. See Felipe Fernandez -Armesto, The Spanish Armada: The Experience of War in 1588 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988); Colin Martin and Geoffrey P arker, The Spanish 
Armada (London: Hamish Hamilton, 1988); Garrett Mattingly, The Armada (Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin, 1959); and David Howarth, The Voyage of the Armada: The Spanish Story (New York: 
Viking, 1981). 
124. On Napoleon, see Richard Glover, Britain at Bay: Defence against Bonaparte, 1803 -14 
(London: Alien and Unwin, 1973); J. Holland Rose and A. M. Broadley, Dumouriez and the 
Defence of England against Napoleon (New York: John Lane, 1909); and H.F.B. Wheeler and 
A. M. Broadley, Napoleon and the Inv asion of England: The Story of the Great Terror (New 
York: John Lane, 1908). On Hitler, see Frank Davis, "Sea Lion: The German Plan to Invade Britain, 1940," in Bartlett, ed., Assault from the Sea, pp. 228 -35; Egber Kieser, Hitler on the 
Doorstep, Operation 'Sea Lion': The German Plan to Invade Britain, 1940, trans. Helmut Bogler 
(Annapolis, MD: U.S. Naval Institute Press, 1997); and Peter Schenk, Invasion of England 1940: 
The Planning of Operation Sealion, trans. Kathleen Bunten (London: Conway Maritime Press, 
1990). 
125. Gen. Hans von Seeckt, a prominent German officer, noted in 1916 that "America 
cannot be attacked by us, and until technology provides us with totally new weapons, England 
itself neither." Quoted in Vagts, Landing Operations, p. 506. 
126. The United Kingdom prepared plans for invading the United States until the late 1890s 
but then gave up on the idea. See Aaron Friedberg, The Weary Titan: Britain and the 
Experience of Relative Decline, 1895- 1905 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1988), 
pp. 162 -65. 
127. As noted, the Allies invaded northwestern France in June 1944 and southern France in 
August 1944. B ut France was not a sovereign state at that point -it was part of the Nazi empire. 
128. One noteworthy case is left out of this anal ysis. In the final year of World War I, the 
United Kingdom, Canada, France, Italy, Japan, and the United States inserted troops into the 
newly established Soviet Union at Archangel (August 2, 1918), Baku (August 4, 1918), 
Murmansk (March 6 and June 23, 1918), and Vladivostok (April 5 and August 3, 1918). Those 
troops eventually fought some bat tles against the Bolsheviks. This case is not relevant, 
however, because the Allies' entrance into the Soviet Union was not an invasion in any 
meaningful sense of that term. The Soviet Union had just been decisively defeated by Germany 
and was in the midst of a civil war. Consequently, the Bolshevik army did not oppose the com -
ing of Allied forces. In fact, the Allies were welcomed into Baku and Archangel. See John Swettenham, Allied Intervention in Russia, 1918- 1919 (Toronto: Ryerson, 1967); and Richard H. 
Ullman, Intervention and the War (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1961). 
129. See William Daugherty, Barbara Levi, and Frank von Hippel, "The Consequence s of 
'Limited' Nuclear Attacks on the United States," International Security 10, No. 4 (Spring 1986), 
pp. 3 -45; and Arthur M. Katz, Life after Nuclear War: The Economic and Social Impacts of 
Nuclear Attacks on the United States (Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1 982). 
130. After listening to a Strategic Air Command (SAC) briefing on March 18, 1954, a U.S. 
navy captain used these words to describe what SAC planned to do to the Soviet Union in the 
event of war. David Alan Rosenberg, "'A Smoking Radiating Ruin at the End of Two Hours': 
Documents on American Plans for Nuclear War with the Soviet Union, 1954- 1955," International 
Security 6, No. 3 (Winter 1981- 82), pp. 11, 25. 
131. Herman Kahn coined the phrase "splendid first strike," which is synony mous with a 
disarmi ng first strike. See Kahn's On Thermonuclear War: Three Lectures and Several 
Suggestions, 2d ed. (New York: Free Press, 1969), pp. 36- 37. 
132. See Charles L. Glaser, Analyzing Strategic Nuclear Policy (Priaceton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1990), chap. 5. 
133. See Benjamin Frankel, "The Brooding Shadow: Systemic Incentives and Nuclear 
Weapons Proliferation," Security Studies 2, Nos. 3 -4 (Spring -Summer 1993), pp. 37- 78; and 
Bradley A. Thayer, "The Causes of Nuclear Proliferation and the Utility of the N uclear 
Nonproliferation Regime," Security Studies 4, No. 3 (Spring 1995), pp. 463 -519. 
134. See Harry R. Borowski, A Hollow Threat: Strategic Air Power and Containment before 
Korea (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1982); David A. Rosenberg, "The Origins of Overki ll: Nuclear 
Weapons and American Strategy, 1945- 1960," International Security 7, No. 4 (Spring 1983), pp. 
14-18; and Ross, American War Plans, passim, esp. pp. 12 -15. A yearly inventory of the 
superpowers' nuclear arsenals for the entire Cold War can be found in Robert S. Norris and 
William M. Arkin, "Nuclear Notebook: Estimated U.S. and Soviet/Russian Nuclear Stockpile, 1945- 94," Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 50, No. 6 (November -December 1994), p. 59. Also 
see Robert S.,Norris and William M. Arkin, "Gl obal Nuclear Stockpiles, 1945- 2000," Bulletin of 
the Atomic Scientists 56, No. 2 (March- April 2000), p. 79. 
135. During the Cold War, some experts argued that it is possible to achieve nuclear 
superiority even in a MAD world. Specifically, they claimed that it was pos sible for the 
superpowers to fight a limited nuclear war with their counterforce weapons (nuclear weapons 
designed to destroy other nuclear weapons, rather than cities), while leaving each other's 
assured destruction capability intact. Each super power would also try to minimize civilian deaths 
on the other side. The superpow er that emerged from this limited nuclear exchange with an 
advantage in counterforce weapons would be the winner, having gained significant coercive 
leverage over the loser. See Colin S. Gray, "Nuclear Strategy: A Case for a Theory of Victory," 
International Security 4, No. 1 (Summer 1979), pp. 54 -87; and Paul Nitze, "Deterring Our 
Deterrent," Foreign Policy, No. 25 (Winter 1976- 77), pp. 195- 210. The case for limited nuclear 
options, however, is flawed for two reasons. First, it is not likely that such a war would remain 
limited. The destruction to each side's soci ety would be enormous, making it difficult to 
distinguish a limited counterforce strike from an all -out attack. Furthermore, we do not know 
much about escalation dynamics in a nuclear war, especially regarding how command- and-
control systems would perform in a nuclear attack. Second, even if it were possible to fight a 
limited nuclear war and minimize casualties, the side with a counterforce advantage would not 
win a meaningful victory, as the following example illustrates. Assume that the Soviets won a 
counterforce exchange between the superpowers; they were left with 500 counterforce 
warheads, the United States had none. In the process, both sides suffered 500,000 casualties, 
and their assured destruction capabilities remained intact. The Soviets are purportedly the 
victors because they have a coun -terforce advantage of 500:0. In fact, that advantage is 
meaningles s, because there are no targets left in the United States that the Soviets can use 
their 500 counter -force weapons against, unless they want to strike at America's cities or its 
assured destruction capability and get annihilated in the process. In short, t he result of this 
limited nuclear war is that both sides suffer equal casualties, both sides have their assured 
destruction capabilities intact, and the Soviet Union has 500 counterforce weapons that it 
cannot use in any meaningful military way. That is a hollow victo ry. Among the best works 
criticizing limited nuclear options are Glaser, Analyzing Strategic Nuclear Policy, chap. 7; and Robert Jervis, "Why Nuclear Superiority Doesn't Matter," Political Science Quarterly 94, No. 4 
(Winter 1979 -80), pp. 617- 33. 
136. Robert S. McNamara, "The Military Role of Nuclear Weapons: Perceptions and 
Misperceptions," Foreign Affairs 62, No. 1 (Fall 1983), p. 79. 
137. The idea that robust stability at the nuclear level allows for instability at the 
conventional level is often called the "stability -instability paradox." See Glenn H. Snyder, "The 
Balance of Power and the Balance of Terror," in Paul Seabury, ed., Bala nce of Power (San 
Francisco: Chandler, 1965), pp. 184- 201. Also see Robert Jervis, The Meaning of the Nuclear 
Revolution: Statecraft and the Prospect of Armageddon (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1989), pp. 19- 22. 
138. On accidental nuclear escalati on, see Bruce G. Blair, The Logic of Accidental Nuclear 
War (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1993); and Scott D. Sagan, The Limits of 
Safety: Organizations, Accidents, and Nuclear Weapons (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1993). On i nadvertent nuclear escalation, see Posen, Inadvertent Escalation. On 
purposeful nuclear escalation, see Herman Kahn, On Escalation: Metaphors and Scenarios, 
rev. ed. (Baltimore, MD: Penguin, 1968); and Thomas Schelling, Arms and Influence (New 
Haven, CT: Y ale University Press, 1966), chaps. 2- 3. The best book on the general 
phenomenon of escalation is Richard Smoke, War: Controlling Escalation (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1977), although it says little about escalation from the conventional to 
the nuclear level, or about escalation in a nuclear war. 
139. Robert Jervis is probably the most articulate proponent of this perspec tive. He writes, 
"The implications of mutual second- strike capability are many and far -reaching. If nuclear 
weapons have had the influence that the nuclear -revolu tion theory indicates they should have, 
then there will be- peace between the super powers, crises will be rare, neither side will be eager 
to press bargaining advantages to the limit, the status quo will be relatively easy to maintain, and political outcomes will not be closely related to either the nuclear or the conventional 
balance. Although the evidence is ambiguous, it generally confirms these propositions." Jervis, 
Meaning of the Nuclear Revolution, p. 45. Also see McGeorge Bundy, Danger and Survival: 
Choices About the Bomb in the First Fifty Years (New York: Random House, 1988). 
140. Assume, for example, that Mexico becomes a great power with a surviv -able nuclear 
deterrent. Also assume that Mexico becomes inte rested in conquering a large expanse of 
territory in the southwestern United States, but otherwise has no interest in conquering American territory. Mexican policymakers might conclude that they could achieve their limited 
aims without causing the United S tates to start a nuclear war. In the event, they probably would 
prove correct. American policy -makers, however, would be much more likely to use nuclear 
weapons if Mexico tried to inflict a decisive defeat on the United States. Shai Feldman makes 
essentia lly the same point regarding the decision by Egypt and Syria to attack a nuclear -armed 
Israel in 1973. Arab policymakers, he argues, thought that Israel would not use its nuclear 
weapons, because the Arab armies were not bent on conquering Israel but were merely aiming 
to recapture territory lost to Israel in the 1967 war. Feldman, Israeli Nuclear Deterrence: A 
Strategy for the 1980s (New York: Columbia University Press, 1982), chap. 3. But as Feldman 
points out, the state that loses a slice of its territor y is likely to think that the victor will want to 
take another slice, and then another slice, and that such "salami tactics" will ultimately lead to its 
destruction. Ibid., pp. 111- 12. The best way to avoid this predicament is to have powerful 
conventional forces that can deter the initial attack; this once again high lights the importance of 
the balance of land power. 
141. For example, the United States spent roughly five times more money on conventional 
forces than on nuclear forces during the early 1980s , and about four times as much by the mid-
1980s. See Harold Brown, Department of Defense Annual Report for Fiscal Year 1982 
(Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense, January 19, 1981), pp. C -4, C-5; and William 
W. Kaufmann, A Reasonable Defense (Washing ton, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1986), pp. 
21, 27. Over the course of the entire Cold War, roughly 25 percent of American defense 
spending went to the nuclear forces. See Steven M. Kosiak, The Lifecycle Costs of Nuclear 
Forces: A Preliminary Assessment (Washington, DC: Defense Budget Project, October 1994), 
p. ii. Another study estimates that about 29 percent of defense spending from 1940 to 1996 
went toward nuclear weapons. See Stephen I. Schwartz, ed., Atomic Audit: The Costs and 
Consequences of U.S . Nuclear Weapons since 1940 (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution 
Press, 1998), p. 3. For evidence of the relative importance of U.S. con ventional forces in 
Europe, consider how the fiscal year 1986 U.S. defense budget, which totaled $313.7 billion, 
was apportioned: roughly $133 billion went to conventional defense of Europe, $54.7 billion 
went to nuclear forces, $34.6 billion went to conventional defense in the Pacific, $20.9 billion 
went to conventional defense of the Persian Gulf, and $16.2 billion w ent to conventional 
defense of Panama and the U.S. homeland. These figures are from Kaufmann, Reasonable 
Defense, p. 14. Also see the works cited in Chapter 6, note 177, of this book. 
142. See Feldman, Israeli Nuclear Deterrence, pp. 106 -12, esp. p. 109. 
143. See Thomas W. Robinson, "The Sino- Soviet Border Conflict," in Stephen S. Kaplan, 
ed., Diplomacy of Power: Soviet Armed Forces as a Political Instrument (Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution Press, 1981), pp. 265 -313; Harrison E. Salisbury, War between Russia and 
China (New York: Norton, 1969); and Richard Wich, Sino -Soviet Crisis Politics: A Study of 
Political Change and Communication (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980), chaps. 
6, 9. 
144. See Sumantra Bose, "Kashmir: Sources of Conflict, D imensions of Peace," Survival 41, 
No. 3 (Autumn 1999), pp. 149 -71; Sumit Ganguly, The Crisis in Kashmir: Portents of War, 
Hopes of Peace (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999); and Devin T. Hagerty, 
"Nuclear Deterrence in South Asia: The 1990 Indo- Pakistani Crisis," International Security 20, 
No. 3 (Winter 1995- 96), pp. 79 -114. 
145. As noted in Chapter 3, note 11, full -scale net assessments require more than just 
measuring the size and quality of the opposing forces. It is also necessary to consider the strategy that both sides would employ and what is likely to happen when the rival forces collide. 
146. See Mako, U.S. Ground Forces, pp. 108- 26; and Weapons Effectiveness 
Indices/Weighted Unit Values III (WEI/WUVIII) (Bethesda, MD: U.S. Army Concepts A nalysis 
Agency, November 1979). Also see Phillip A. Karber et al., Assessing the Correlation of Forces: 
France 1940, Report No. BDM/W -79-560-TR (McLean, VA: BDM Corporation, June 18, 1979), 
which uses this methodology to assess the balance of forces between Germany and the Allies 
in the spring of 1940. 
147. Poseii, "Measuring the European Conventional Balance," pp. 51- 54, 66 -70. 
148. For examples of how one might do this kind of analysis, see Joshua Epstein, 
Measuring Military Power: The Soviet Air Threat t o Europe (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1984); and Posen, Inadvertent Escalation, pp. 101 -6. 
149. The prospects for peace would also be enhanced if each of those states had an 
ethnically homogeneous population, because then there would be no e thnic civil wars. 
 
CHAPTER SIX 
 
1. Only one study deals directly with offensive realism's claim that status quo powers are 
seldom seen in the international system. Eric Labs examined the war aims of Prussia during the Austro -Prussian War (1866), of Prussi a in the Franco- Prussian War (1870- 71), of the United 
Kingdom during World War I (1914- 18), and of the United States in the Korean War (1950- 53). 
He sought to determine whether security concerns drove those states to jump at. wartime opportunities to gain relative power, as offensive realism would predict, or whether they were 
content to maintain the status quo. In other words, do war aims tend to remain fixed over the course of a conflict, or are they more likely to expand? He found that all four cases "provide 
strong support" for offensive realism. "Statesmen expanded their war aims . . . [and] pushed the 
international system for all its worth," he argued, because they believed that maximizing their 
relative power was the best way "to secure their interes ts ... in a postwar world." Eric J. Labs, 
"Offensive Realism and Why States Expand Their War Aims," Security Studies 6, No. 4 
(Summer 1997), pp. 1 -49. The quotes are from pp. 21, 46. 
2. Although the United States was not a great power until the end of the nine teenth century, 
its behavior during that entire century is of direct relevance for assessing offensive realism. 
Also, Japan was not a great power until 1895. However, I consider its behavior between the 
Meiji Restoration (in 1868) and 1895 because it has direct bearing on events after 1895. For 
reasons of space, I do not examine the actions of the complete universe of great powers 
between 1792 and 1990. Specifically, I omit Austria/Austria- Hungary (1792 -1918), France 
(1792- 1940), Prussia (1792- 1862), and Russia (1792- 1917). However, lam confident that a sur -
vey of the foreign policy behavior of these states would not contradict —indeed, would support —
the main tenets of offensive realism. 
3. This phrase is taken from Richard J.B. Bosworth, Italy, The Leas t of the Great Powers: 
Italian Foreign Policy before the First World War (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1979). 
4. The quotation is from Nicholas Spykman, America's Strategy in World Politics: The United 
States and the Balance of Power (New York: H arcourt, Brace, 1942), p. 20. 
5. Quoted in Marius B. Jansen, "Japanese Imperialism: Late Meiji Perspectives," in Ramon 
H. Myers and Mark R. Peattie, eds., The Japanese Colonial Empire, 1895- 1945 (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1984), p. 64. 
6. W. G. Beasley, The Modern History of Japan, 2d ed. (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 
1973), chaps. 6 -8; and Marius B. Jansen, ed., The Cambridge History of Japan, vol. 5, The 
Nineteenth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), chaps. 5 -11. 
7. Akira Iriye, "Japan's Drive to Great -Power Status," in Jansen, ed., Cambridge History, vol. 
5, pp. 721 -82. 
8. Among the best surveys of Japanese foreign policy over this period are: W. G. Beasley, 
Japanese Imperialism, 1894- 1945 (Oxford: Clarendon, 1987); James B. Crowley, "Japan's 
Military Foreign Policies," in Jarnes W. Morley, ed., Japan's Foreign Policy, 1868- 1941: A 
Research Guide (New York: Columbia University Press, 1974), pp. 3 -117; Peter Duus, ed., The 
Cambridge History of Japan, vol. 6, The Twent ieth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1988), chaps. 5- 7; and lan Nish, Japanese Foreign Policy, 1869- 1942: Kasumigaseki to 
Miyakezaka (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1977). 
9. Nobutaka Ike, "War and Modernization," in Robert E. Ward, ed., Political Development in 
Modern Japan (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1968), p. 189. 
10. Jack Snyder, Myths of Empire: Domestic Politics and International Ambition (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 1991), p. 114. Also see Michael A. Barnhart, Japan Prepares for Total 
War: The Search for Economic Security, 1919- 1941 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1987), p. 17. 
11. Mark R. Peattie, "Introduction," in Myers and Peattie, eds., Japanese Colonial Empire, p. 
9. 
12. E. H. Norman, "Japan's Emergence as a Modern State," in John W. Dower, ed., Origins 
of the Modern Japanese State: Selected Writings ofE. H. Norman (New York: Random House, 
1975), p. 305. Also see Marius B. Jansen, "Japanese Imperialism: Late Meiji Perspectives," in 
Myers and Peattie, eds., Japanese Colonial Empire, p. 62; and Marius B. Jansen, 
"Modernization and Foreign Policy in Meiji Japan," in Ward, ed., Political Development, pp. 149 -
88. 
13. Quoted in Hiroharu Seki, "The Manchurian Incident, 1931," trans. Marius B. Jansen, in 
James W. Morley, ed., Japan Erupts: The London Naval Conference and the Manchurian Incident, 1928 -1932 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1984), p. 143. 
14. Quoted in Peattie, "Introduction," in Myers and Peattie, eds., Japanese Colonial Empire, . 
15. 
15. Hilary Conroy, The Japanese Seizure of Korea, 1868 -1910: A Study of Realism and 
Idealism in International Relations (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1960); and 
M. Frederick Nelson, Korea and the Old Orders in Eastern Asia (New York: Russell and Russell, 
1945). 
16. Beasley, Japanese Imperialism, chaps. 4 -5. 
17. Beasley, Japanese Imperialism, chap. 6. 
18. Among the best sources on the Russo- Japanese Warfare Committee of Imperial 
Defence, The Official History of the Russo -Japanese War, 3 vols. (London: His Majesty's 
Stationery Office, 1910 -20); R. M. Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and Tumbling Bear: 
A Military History of the Russo -Japanese War, 1904- 1905 (London: Routledge, 1988); A. N. 
Kuropatkin, The Russian Army and the Japanese War, trans. A. B. Lindsay, 2 vols. (London: 
John Murray, 1909); lan Nish, The Origins of the Russo- Japanese War (London: Longman, 
1985); J. N. Westwood, Russia against Japan, 1904- 1905: A New Look at the Russo -Japanese 
War (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986); and John A. White, The Diplomacy of 
the Russo -Japanese War (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1964). 
19. Beasley, Japanese Imperialism, chap. 7. 
20. Beasley, Japanese Imperialism, chap. 8. 
21. James W. Morley, The Japanese Thrust into Siberia, 1918 (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1957). Also see Chapter 4, note 128, of this book. 
22. Emily O . Goldman, Sunken Treaties: Naval Arms Control between the Wars (University 
Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1994); and Stephen E. Pelz, Race to Pearl Harbor: 
The Failure of the Second London Naval Conference and the Onset of World War II 
(Cambri dge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1974). 
23. Crowley, "Japan's Military Foreign Policies," pp. 39 -54. 
24. Among the best studies of the period are Barnhart, Japan Prepares for Total War; Alvin 
D. Coox, Nomonhan: Japan against Russia, 1939, 2 vols. (Stanf ord, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 1985); and James B. Crowley, Japan's Quest for Autonomy: National Security and Foreign Policy, 1930 -1938 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1966). 
25. Seki, "The Manchurian Incident"; Sadako N. Ogata, Defiance i n Manchuria: The Making 
of Japanese Foreign Policy, 1931 -1932 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1964); Mark R. 
Peattie, Ishiwara Kanji and Japan's Confrontation with the West (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1975), chaps. 4 -5; and Toshi hiko Shimada, "The Extension of Hostilities, 
1931- 1932," trans. Akira Iriye, in Morley, ed., Japan Erupts, pp. 233- 335. 
26. Peter Duus, Raymond H. Myers, and Mark R. Peattie, eds., The Japanese Formal 
Empire in China, 1895- 1937 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1989); and Shimada 
Toshihiko, "Designs on North China, 1933- 1937," trans. James B. Crowley, in James W. Morley, 
ed., The China Quagmire: Japan's Expansion on the Asian Continent, 1933- 1941 (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1983), pp. 3 -230. 
27. George H. Blakeslee, "The Japanese Monroe Doctrine," Foreign Affairs 11, No. 4 (July 
1933), pp. 671- 81. 
28. Ikuhiko Hata, "The Marco Polo Bridge Incident, 1937," trans. David Lu and Katsumi 
Usui, "The Politics of War, 1937- 1941," trans. David Lu, in Morley, ed., China Quagmire, pp. 
233-86, 289- 435. 
29. Alvin D. Coox, The Anatomy of a Small War: The Soviet -Japanese Struggle for 
Changkufeng- Khasan, 1938 (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1977); Coox, Nomonhan, vols. 1 -2; 
and Hata, "The Japanese- Soviet Confron tation, 1935- 1939," trans. Alvin D. Coox, in James W. 
Morley, ed., Deterrent Diplomacy: Japan, Germany, and the USSR, 1935 -1940 (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1976), pp. 113 -78. 
30. This phase of Japanese expansion is discussed in detail later in this chapter. 
31. For a synoptic discussion of Bismarck as a realist and a nationalist, see Bruce Waller, 
Bismarck, 2d ed. (Oxford: Blackwell, 1997), chaps. 2 -4. Probably the two best biographies of 
Bismarck, which deal with these matters in greater detail, are Lothar Gall, Bismarck: The White 
Revolutionary, vol. I, 1851- 1871, trans. J. A. Underwood (Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1986); and 
Otto Pflanze, Bismarck and the Development of Germany: The Period of Unification, 1815 -1871 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1973). 
32. The key works on this subject are Andreas Hillgruber, Germany and the Two World 
Wars, trans. William C. Kirby (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982), chap. 2; and 
Eberhard Jackel, Hitler's World View: A Blueprint for Power, trans. Herbert Arnold (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1981), chaps. 2, 5. Also see Dale C. Copeland, The Origins of Major War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2000), chap. 5; Gordon A. Craig, Germany, 
1866- 1945 (Oxford: Oxford University Pr ess, 1980), pp. 673- 77; and Sebastian Haffner, The 
Meaning of Hitler, trans. Ewald Osers (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1979), pp. 75 -
95. Hitler's most comprehensive writings on foreign policy are found not in Mein Kampf, but in 
Hitler's Secret Book, trans. Salvator Attanasio (New York: Bramhall House, 1986). 
33. David Calleo, The German Problem Reconsidered: Germany and the World Order, 1870 
to the Present (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978), p. 119. Also see Ludwig Dehio, 
Germany and World Politics in the Twentieth Century, trans. Dieter Pevsner (New York: Norton, 
1959); Fritz Fischer, From Kaiserreich to Third Reich: Elements of Continuity in German History, 1871- 1945, trans. Roger Fletcher (London: Alien and Unwin, 1986); Klaus Hildebrand, The 
Foreign Policy of the Third Reich, trans. Anthony Fothergill (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1973), pp. 1 -11, 135- 47; and Woodruff D. Smith, The Ideological Origins of Nazi 
Imperialism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986). 
34. See Henry A. Turner, Hitler's Thirty Days to Power, January 1933 (Reading, MA: 
Addison- Wesley, 1996), pp. 173 -74. 
35. Evidence of Germany's ambitious goals is found in the list of war aims drawn up by 
Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann- Hollweg one month after the outbreak of World War I. See 
Fritz Fischer, Germany's Aims in the First World War (New York: Norton, 1967), pp. 103- 6. Also 
see Stephen Van Evera, Causes of War: Power and the Roots of Conflict (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1999), pp. 202 -3. 
36. See Chapter 8. 
37. Among the best overviews of European politics between 1870 and 1900 are Luigi 
Albertini, The Origins of the War of 1914, vol. I, European Relations from the Congress of Berlin 
to the Eve of the Sarajevo Murder, ed. and trans. Isabella M . Massey (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1952), chaps. 1- 2; Imanuel Geiss, German Foreign Policy, 1871- 1914 (London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1979), chaps. 3- 9; William L. Langer, European Alliances and 
Alignments, 1871- 1890 (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1939); William L. Langer, The Diplomacy of 
Imperialism, 1890- 1902, 2d ed. (New York: Knopf, 1956); Norman Rich, Friedrich Von Holstein: 
Politics and Diplomacy in the Era of Bismarck and Wilhelm II, 2 vols. (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1965), pts . 2-5; Glenn H. Snyder, Alliance Politics (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1997); and A.J.P. Taylor, The Struggle for Mastery in Europe, 1848- 1918 
(Oxford: Clarendon, 1954), chaps. 10- 17. 
38. The phrase is W. N. Medlicott's, although he too argues that it is not an accurate 
description of Bismarck. See W. N. Medlicott, Bismarck and Modern Germany (New York: Harper and Row, 1965), p. 180. 
39. See George F. Kennan, The Decline of Bismarck's European Order: Franco- Russian 
Relations, 1875- 1890 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1979), pp. 11 -23; and Taylor, 
Struggle, pp. 225- 27. 
40. Joseph V. Fuller, Bismarck's Diplomacy at Its Zenith (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1922), chaps. 6 -8; William D. Irvine, The Boulanger Affair Reconsidered: 
Royalism, Boulangism, and the Origins of the Radical Right in France (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1989); and Langer, European Alliances, chap. 11. 
41. Kennan, Decline, p. 338. 
42. Richard D. Challener, The French Theory of the Nation in Ar ms, 1866- 1939 (New York: 
Russell and Russell, 1965), chaps. 1- 2; Allan Mitchell, Victors and Vanquished: The German 
Influence on Army and Church in Prance after 1870 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 
Press, 1984), chaps. 1- 5; Barry R. Posen, "Nati onalism, the Mass Army, and Military Power," 
International Security 18, No. 2 (Fall 1993), pp. 109- 17; and David Stevenson, Armaments and 
the Coming of War: Europe, 1904 -1914 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996), pp. 56- 58. 
43. See Chapters. 
44. Among the best overviews of European politics between 1900 and 1914 are Albertini, 
Origins of the War, vol. I, chaps. 3- 10; Geiss, German Foreign Policy, chaps. 8 -17; David G. 
Herrmann, The Arming of Europe and the Making of the First World War (Prince ton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1996); Rich, Holstein, vol. 2, pts. 5 -6; Snyder, Alliance Politics; 
Stevenson, Armaments and the Coming of War; and Taylor, Struggle, chaps. 17 -22. 
45. At the start of the crisis in July 1914, Germany wanted a local war in the Balkans 
involving Austria -Hungary and Serbia. It was willing, however, to accept a continental war that 
pitted Austria- Hungary and Germany against France and Russia. It did not want a world war, 
however, which would mean British involve ment in the conflict. See Jack S. Levy, "Preferences, 
Constraints, and Choices in July 1914," International Security 15, No. 3 (Winter 1990- 91), pp. 
154-61. As the crisis evolved, it became increasingly clear that Europe was headed for either a 
conti nental or a worl d war, not a local war. Germany, which had played the key role in fueling 
the crisis from the start, made little effort to end it as war loomed closer. In fact, Germany saw a 
major war with France and Russia as an opportunity to 1) break its encirclement by the Triple Entente, 2) crush Russia, which it feared would grow more powerful than Germany in the near 
future, and 3) establish hegemony in Europe. For evidence that these goals dominated German 
thinking, see, for example, Copeland, Origins of Major War, chaps. 3- 4; Fritz Fischer, War of 
Illusions: German Policies from 1911 to 1914, trans. Marian Jackson (New York: Norton, 1975), chaps. 22 -23; Imanuel Geiss, ed., July 1914, The Outbreak of the First World War: Selected 
Documents (New York: Norton, 1974); Konrad H. Jarausch, "The Illusion of Limited War: 
Chancellor Bethmann -Hollweg's Calculated Risk, July 1914," Central European History 2, No. 1 
European History 2, No. 1 (March 1969), pp. 48- 76; Wayne C. Thompson, In the Eye of the 
Storm: Kurt Riezler and t he Crises of Modern Germany (Ames: University of Iowa Press, 1980), 
chaps. 2 -3; and the works cited in note 35 of this chapter. 
46. The sections of the Versailles Treaty dealing with the size and shape of the German 
military can be found in U.S. Department of State, The Treaty of Versailles and After: 
Annotations of the Text of the Treaty (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1947), 
pp. 301 -65. 
47. On Germany's fear of Poland, see Michael Geyer, "German Strategy in the Age of 
Machine Warfare, 1914 -1945," in Peter Paret, ed., Makers of Modern Strategy: From 
Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986), pp. 561- 63; 
and Gaines Post, Jr., The Civil- Military Fabric of Weimar Foreign Policy (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1973), pp. 101 -10. The case of Poland in the years immediately 
after World War I appears to provide additional support for offensive realism. That newly created 
state briefly enjoyed a marked military advantage over Germany and the Soviet Union, which 
were both devastated by defeat in World War I. Sensing an opportunity to gain power and 
enhance its secu rity, Poland set out to break apart the Soviet Union and create a powerful 
Polish -led federation that included Lithuania, Belorussia, and Ukraine. Poles "dreamed of a 
reestablishment of the powerful and vast country which once was the Kingdom of Poland." Josef 
Korbel, Poland between East and West: Soviet and German Diplomacy toward Poland, 1919 -
1933 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Pres s, 1963), p. 33. Also see the sources cited in 
Chapter 3, note 41, of this book. 
48. See Edward W. Bennett, German Rearmament and the West, 1932 -1933 (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1979); Jon Jacobson, Locarno Diplomacy: Germany and the West, 1925 -1929 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1972); Christopher M. Kimmich, 
The Free City: Danzig and German Foreign Policy, 1919 -1934 (New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 1968); Post, Civil- Military Fabric; Marshall M.. Lee and Wolfgang Michalk a, German 
Foreign Policy, 1917 -1933: Continuity or Break? (New York: Berg, 1987); and Smith, Ideological 
Origins, chap. 9. 
49. Toward this end, on April 16, 1922, Weimar Germany and the Soviet Union signed the 
secret Rapallo Treaty, "a many -sided, intimate, and long- lasting cooperative arrangement" that 
allowed Germany to covertly enhance its military capability in violation of the Treaty of 
Versailles. Jiri Hochman, The Soviet Union and the Failure of Collective Security, 1934 -1938 
(Ithaca, NY: .Cornell University Press, 1984), p. 17. Also see Hans W. Gatzke, "Russo- German 
Military Collaboration dur ing the Weimar Republic," American Historical Review 63, No. 3 (April 
1958), pp. 565- 97; Aleksandr M. Nekrich, Pariahs, Partners, Predators: German -Soviet 
Relations, 1922- 1941 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997),. chaps. 1 -2; and Kurt 
Rosenbaum, Community of Fate: German -Soviet Diplomatic Relations, 1922- 1928 (Syracuse, 
NY: Syracuse University Press, 1965). 
50. Henry L. Bretton, Stresemann and the Revision of Versailles: A Fight for Reason 
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1953), p. 25. Also see Manfred J. Enssle, Str esemann 
's Territorial Revisionism: Germany, Belgium, and the Eupen- Malmedy Question, 1919 -1929 
(Wiesbaden, FRG: Franz Steiner, 1980); Hans W. Gatzke, Stresemann and the Rearmament of 
Germany (New York: Norton, 1969); and the works cited in note 48 of this chapter. On the 
influence of Machtpolitik in Weimar, see Post, Civil- Miliatry Fabric, pp. 81 -82, 164 -67, 311- 12. 
51. Among the best sources on Nazi aggression are Hildebrand, Foreign Policy of the Third 
Reich; Hillgruber, Germany, chaps. 5- 9; Norman Rich, Hitler's War Aims: Ideology, the Nazi 
State, and the Course of German Expansion (New York: Norton, 1973); Telford Taylor, Sword and Swastika: Generals and Nazis in the Third Reich (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1952); 
Gerhard L. Weinberg, The Foreign Poli cy of Hitler's Germany: Diplomatic Revolution in Europe, 
1933- 36 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1 970); and Gerhard L. Weinberg, The Foreign 
Policy of Hitler's Germany: Starting World War II, 1937- 39 (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1980). 
52. On the growth of the German military in the 1930s, see Chapter 8. 
53. Richard Pipes, The Formation of the Soviet Union: Communism and Nationalism, 1917 -
1923 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1957), p. 1. Also see William C. Fuller, Jr., 
Strategy and Power in Russia, 1600 -1914 (New York: Free Press, 1992); Geoffrey Hosking, 
Russia: People and Empire, 1552 -1917 (Cambridge, MA; Harvard University Press, 1997), pt. 1; 
Barbara Jelavich, A Century of Russian Foreign Policy, 1814- 1914 (Philadelphia: J. B. 
Lippincott, 1964); and John P. LeDonne, The Russian Empire and the World, 1 700 -191 7: The 
Geopolitics of Expansion and Containment (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997). 
54. Fuller, Strategy and Power, p. 132. Also see pp. 34, 125 -27, 134- 39, 174- 75; and 
Hosking, Russia, pp. 3- 4, 41. 
55. Both quotes are from Stephen M. Walt, Revolution and War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1996), p. 129. 
56. This phrase is from Jon Jacobson, When the Soviet Union Entered World Politics 
(Berkeley: University o f California Press, 1994), p. 3, describing the scholar ly consensus on 
Lenin's foreign policy. 
57. Richard K. Debo, Revolution and Survival: The Foreign Policy of Soviet Russia, 1917- 18 
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1979), p. 416. Also see Piero Melograni, Lenin and the 
Myth of World Revolution: Ideology and Reasons of State, 191 7 -1920, trans. Julie Lerro 
(Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press International, 1979), which argues that Lenin did not 
want a world revolution because it would have brought communist and socialist parties to power 
in other states that probably would have dominated the European left at the expense of the 
Bolsheviks. 
58. On Stalin as a realist, see P.M.H. Bell, The Origins of the Second World War in Europe, 
2d ed. (London: Longman, 1997), pp. 136- 37; David Holloway, Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet 
Union and Atomic Energy, 1939 -1956 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1994). pp. 168 -
69; Henry Kissinger, Diplomacy (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1994), chaps. 13-20; Vojtech 
Mastny, Russia's Road to the Cold War: Diplomacy, Warfare, and the Politics of Communism, 
1941- 1945 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1979), p. 223; Adam B. Ulam, Expansion 
and Coexistence: Soviet Foreign Policy, 1917 -1973, 2d ed. (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and 
Winston, 1974), p. 144; and Vladislav Zubok and Constantine Pleshakov, Inside the Kremlin's 
Cold War: From Stalin to Khrushchev (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996), pp. 18, 
38. Also see Vladimir O. Pechatnov, "The Big Three after World War II: New Documents on 
Soviet Thinking about Post War Relations with the United States and Britain," Cold War 
International History Project [CWIHP] Working Paper No. 13 (Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson 
International Center for Scholars, July 1995), which makes apparent that at least three of 
Stalin's main foreign policy advisers saw the world in terms of realpolitik. On Nazi -Soviet 
cooperation between August 1939 and June 1941, see the works cited in Chapter 2, note 59, of this book. 
59. Zubok and Pleshakov, Inside the Kremlin's Cold War, p. 139. 
60. Barrington Moore, Jr., Soviet Politics —The Dilemma of Power: The Role of Ideas in 
Social Change (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1950), p. 408. Also see ibid., pp. 
350-51, 382- 83, 390 -92; Francesca Gori and Silvio Pons, eds., The Soviet Union and Europe in 
the Cold War, 1945 -1953 (London: Macmillan, 1996); Walter Lippmann, The Cold War: A Study 
in U.S. Foreign Policy (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1947); Samuel L. Sharp, "National 
Interest: Key to Soviet Politics," in Erik P. Hoffmann and Frederic J. Fleron, Jr., eds., The 
Conduct of Soviet Foreign Policy (Chicago: Aldine -Atherton, 1971), pp. 108 -17; Snyder, Myths 
of Empire, chap. 6; Ulam, Expansion and Coexistence; William C. Wohlfort h, The Elusive 
Balance: Power and Perceptions during the Cold War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1993); and Zubok and Pleshakov, Inside the Kremlin's Cold War. 
61. Among the works that emphasize the role of ideology in Soviet foreign policy are 
Jacobson, When the Soviet Union Entered; Douglas J. Macdonald, "Communist Bloc Expansion 
in the Early Cold War: Challenging Realism, Refuting Revisionism," International Security 20, 
No. 3 (Winter 1995- 96), pp. 152 -88; Teddy J. Uldricks, Diplomacy and Ideology: The Origins of 
Soviet Foreign Relations, 1917 -1930 (London: Sage, 1979); and Walt, Revolution and War, 
chap. 4. 
62. See E. H. Carr, The Bolshevik Revolution, 1917- 1923, vol. 3 (New York: Macmillan, 
1961), chaps. 21 -25; Debo, Revolution and Survival; Richard K. Debo, Survival and 
Consolidation: The Foreign Policy of Soviet Russia, 1918 -1921 (Montreal: McGill -Queen's 
University Press, 1992); Ulam, Expansion and Coexistence, chap. 3; and Walt, Revolution and 
War, chap. 4. 
63. See John W. Wheeler -Bennett, Brest -Litovsk: The Forgotten Peace, March 1918 (New 
York: Norton, 1971). 
64. See Chapter 4, note 128, of this book. 
65. See Debo, Survival and Consolidation, chaps. 13- 14; James M. McCann, "Beyond the 
Bug: Soviet Historiogr aphy of the Soviet -Polish War of 1920," Soviet Studies 36, No. 4 (October 
1984), pp. 475- 93; and the sources cited in Chapter 3, note 41, of this book. This case supports 
Eric Labs's claim that states expand their war aims whenever opportunities to conquer territory 
arise during the fighting. See Labs, "Offensive Realism." 
66. As noted earlier, Japan kept its troops in Siberia until 1922 and in northern Sakhalin until 
1925. 
67. See Carr, Bolshevik Revolution, vol. 3, chaps. 26 -34; R. Craig Nation, Black Ea rth, Red 
Star: A History of Soviet Security Policy, 1917- 1991 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1992), chap. 2; Jacobson, When the Soviet Union Entered; Teddy J. Uldricks, "Russia and 
Europe: Diplomacy, Revolution, and Economic Development in the 1920s," International History 
Review 1, No. 1 (January 1979), pp. 55 -83; Ulam, Expansion and Coexistence, chap. 4; and 
Walt, Revolution and War, pp. 175- 201. 
68. See the sources cited in note 49 in this chapter. 
69. Quoted in Robert C. Tucker, Stalin in Power: The Revolution from Above, 1928 -1941 
(New York: Norton, 1990), p. 9. For a detailed discussion of Stalin's industrialization policy in the 
decade before World War II, see ibid., chaps. 3 -5; and Alec Nove, An Economic History of the 
USSR, 1917- 1991, 3d ed. (New York: Penguin, 1992), chaps. 7- 9. 
70. Jonathan Haslam, The Soviet Union and the Threat from the East, 1933- 1941: Moscow, 
Tokyo and the Prelude to the Pacific War (Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1992). 
71. See Chapter 8. 
72. See the s ources cited in Chapter 5, note 28. 
73. Nikita Khrushchev, Khrushchev Remembers, trans. and ed. Strobe Talbott (Boston: 
Little, Brown, 1970), p. 134. 
74. Mastny, Russia's Road to the Cold War; and Ulam, Expansion and Coexistence, chap. 
7. 
75. Russell D. Bu hite, Decisions at Yalta: An Appraisal of Summit Diplomacy (Wilmington, 
DE: Scholarly Resources, 1986), chap. 5; Diane S. Clemens, Yalta (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1970), pp. 58 -62, 247- 55; Herbert Feis, Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin: The War They 
Waged and the Peace They Sought (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1957), pp. 505 -
18; and Odd Arne Westad, Cold War and Revolution: Soviet -American Rivalry and the Origins 
of the Chinese Civil War, 1944- 1946 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993), chap. 1. 
76. Bruce Cumings, The Origins of the Korean War, vol. I, Liberation and the Emergence of 
Separate Regimes, 1945 -1947 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, Korean War, 1945-
1950: New Evidence from Russian Archives," CWIHP Working Paper N o. 8 (Washington, DC: 
Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, November 1993). 
77. In 1948, however, American policymakers believed that there were 4 mil lion people 
serving in the Soviet armed forces, not 2.87 million. See Matthew A. Evangelista, "Stalin's 
Postwar Army Reappraised," International Security 7, No. 3 (Winter 1982 -83), pp. 110- 38; and 
the articles by Phillip A. Karber and Jerald A. Combs, John S. Duffield, and Matthew 
Evangelista in "Assessing the Soviet Threat to Europe: A Roundtable ," Diplomatic History 22, 
No. 3 (Summer 1998), pp. 399 -449. Despite these inflated U.S. intelligence estimates, Western 
policymakers in the late 1940s thought it was unlikely that the Red Army would strike into Western Europe. Fear of a Soviet blitzkrieg became a serious concern after North Korea 
invaded South Korea in June 1950. See Ulam, Expansion and Coexistence, pp. 404, 438, 498. 
78. Douglas Macdonald writes, "The oral memoirs of both Khrushchev and Molotov, as well 
as much of the other new evidence, confirm that Stalin's fear of U.S. power was the most 
important constraint on Soviet expansionism." Macdonald, "Communist Bloc Expansion," p. 161. 
79. See Werner Hahn, Postwar Soviet Politics: The Fall of Zhdanov and the Defeat of 
Moderation, 1946 -1953 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1982); Holloway, Stalin and the 
Bomb, chap. 8; Vojtech Mastny, The Cold War and Soviet Insecurity: The Stalin Years (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1996); Pechat nov, "The Big Three"; Ulam, Expansion and 
Coexistence, chaps. 8 -13; and Zubok and Pleshakov, Inside the Kremlin's Cold War, chaps. 1 -3 
and "Postmortem." Also see the quotes from Molotov and Stalin in Marc Trachtenberg, A 
Constructed Peace: The Making of the European Settlement, 1945- 1963 (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1999), pp. 19, 36. 
80. Louise L. Fawcett, Iran and the Cold War: The Azerbaijan Crisis of 1946 (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1992); Bruce Kuniholm, The Origins of the Cold War in the Near 
East: Great Power Conflict and Diplomacy in Iran, Turkey, and Greece (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1980), chaps. 3 -6; and Natalia I. Yegorova, "The 'Iran Crisis' of 1945 -1946: A 
View from the Russian Archives," CWHIP Workin g Paper No. 15 (Washington, DC: Woodrow 
Wilson International Center for Scholars, May 1996). 
81. Kuniholm, The Origins of the Cold War, chaps. 1, 4 -6; Melvyn P. Leffler, "Strategy, 
Diplomacy, and the Cold War: The United States, Turkey, and NATO, 1945- 1952," Journal of 
American History 71, No. 4 (March 1985), pp. 807 -25; and Eduard Mark, "The War Scare of 
1946 and Its Consequences," Diplomatic History 21, No. 3 (Summer 1997), pp. 383- 415. 
82. The Soviet Union also reached an agreement with the West in 1955 to pull Soviet and 
NATO forces out of Austria and make it a neutral state in the East -West conflict. But there were 
good strategic reasons for the Soviets to cut this deal, as Audrey K. Cronin makes clear in Great 
Power Politics and the Struggle over Austr ia, 1945- 1955 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1986). 
83. Among the best sources on Soviet policy in Asia are Sergei N. Goncharov, John W. 
Lewis, and Xue Litai, Uncertain Partners: Stalin, Mao, and the Korean War (Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Pr ess, 1993); Westad, Cold War and Revolution; and Michael M. Sheng, 
Battling Western Imperialism: Mao, Stalin, and the United States (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1997). 
84. Goncharov, Lewis, and Litai, Uncertain Partners, chap. 5; Mastny, The Cold War, pp. 85-
97; Weathersby, "Soviet Aims in Korea"; and Kathryn Weathersby, "To Attack or Not to Attack: Stalin, Kim II Sung, and the Prelude to War," CWIHP Bulletin 5 (Spring 1995), pp. 1- 9. 
85. See inter alia Galia Golan, The Soviet Union and National Liberation Movements in the 
Third World (Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1988); Andrzej Korbonski and Francis Fukuyama, eds., 
The Soviet Union and the Third World: The Last Three Decades (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1987); Bruce D. Porter, The USSR in Third World Conflicts: Soviet Arms and Diplomacy in Local Wars, 1945- 1980 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984); and Carol R. 
Saivetz, ed., The Soviet Union in the Third World (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1989). 
86. See Jeffrey T. Checkel, Ideas and International Political Change: Soviet/Russian 
Behavior and the End of the Cold War (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1997); Matthew 
Evangelista, Unarmed Forces: The Transnational Movement to End the Cold War (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 1999); Robert G. Herman, "Identity, Norms and National Security: The 
Soviet Foreign Policy Revolution and the End of the Cold War," in Peter J. Katzenstein, ed., The 
Culture of National Security: Norms and Identity in World Politics (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1996), pp. 271 -316; and Richard Ned Lebow and Thomas W. Risse- Kappen, 
eds., International Relations Theory and the End of the Cold War (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1995). 
87. Stephen G. Brooks and William C. Wohlforth, "Power, Globalization, and the End of the 
Cold War: Reevaluating a Landmark Case for Ideas," International Security 25, No. 3 (Winter 
2000- 2001), pp. 5 -53; William C. Wohlforth, "Realism and the End of the Cold War," 
International Security 19, No. 3 (Winter 1994 -95), pp. 91 -129; and Randall L. Schweller and 
William C. Wohlforth, "Power Test: Evaluating Realism in Response to the End of the Cold War," Security Studies 9, No. 3 (Spring 2000), pp. 60- 107. Also see Chapters 3 and 10 of this 
book ; and the com ments of former Soviet policymakers in William C. Wohlforth, ed., Witnesses 
to the End of the Cold War (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996), pt. 1. 
88. Ronald G. Suny, The Revenge of the Past: Nationalism, Revolution, and the Collapse of 
the Soviet Union (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1993). 
89. Offensive realism would be falsified if an economically healthy Soviet Union had opted to 
abandon Eastern Europe becaus e its leaders were convinced that security competition was no 
longer an important aspect of international politics. 
90. Among the best sources on Italian foreign policy are H. James Burgwyn, Italian Foreign 
Policy in the Interwar Period, 1918- 1940 (Westpor t, CT: Praeger, 1997); Bosworth, Italy, the 
Least of the Great Powers; Alan Cassels, Mussolini's Early Diplomacy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1970); MacGregor Knox, Mussolini Unleashed, 1939- 1941: Politics and 
Strategy in Fascist Italy's Las t War (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982); C. J. Lowe 
and P. Marzari, Italian Foreign Policy, 1870 -1940 (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1987); 
Christopher Seton -Watson, Italy from Liberalism to Fascism, 1870- 1925 (London: Methuen, 
1967); Denis Mack Smith, Modern Italy: A Political History (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan 
Press, 1997); Denis Mack Smith, Mussolini's Roman Empire (New York: Viking, 1976); and 
Brian R. Sullivan, "The Strategy of the Decisive Weight: Italy, 1882 -1922," in Williams on Murray, 
MacGregor Knox, and Alvin Bernstein, eds.. The Making of Strategy: Rulers, States, and War 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), pp. 307 -51. 
91. Bosworth, Italy, the Least of the Great Powers, p. viii. Also see Ottavio Barie, "Italian 
Imperialism: The First Stage," Journal of Italian History 2, No. 3 (Winter 1979), pp. 531- 65; and 
Federico Chabod, Italian Foreign Policy: The Statecraft of the Founders, trans. William McCuaig 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996). 
92. Maxwell H.H. Macartney and Paul Cremona, Italy's Foreign and Colonial Policy, 1914-
1937 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1938), p. 12. 
93. Seton- Watson, Italy, p. 29. 
94. John Gooch, Army, State, and Society in Italy, 1870 -1915 (New York: St. Martin's, 
1989); "It alian Military Efficiency: A Debate," Journal of Strategic Studies 5, No. 2 (June 1982), 
pp. 248 -77; MacGregor Knox, Hitler's Italian Allies: Royal Armed Forces, Fascist Regime, and 
the War of 1940- 1943 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000); Smith, Mussolini's 
Roman Empire, chap. 13; and Brian R. Sullivan, "The Italian Armed Forces, 1918 -40," in Allan 
R. Millett and Williamson Murray, eds., Military Effectiveness, vol. 2, The Interwar Period 
(Boston: Alien and Unwin, 1988), pp. 169- 217. 
95. Quoted in Gooch, Army, State, and Society, p. xi. 
96. Sullivan, "Strategy of Decisive Weight." 
97. See William A. Renzi, In the Shadow of the Sword: Italy's Neutrality and Entrance into 
the Great War, 1914 -1915 (New York: Peter Lang, 1987); and Seton- Watson, Italy, chap. 11. 
98. Smith, Modern Italy, p. 89. 
99. Seton- Watson, Italy, p. 430. 
100. A copy of the Treaty of London can be found in Rene Albrecht -Carrie, Italy at the Paris 
Peace Conference (New York: Columbia University Press, 1938), pp. 334- 39. Also relevant is 
the February 7, 1919, "Italian Memorandum of Claims," presented at the Paris Peace 
Conference, a copy of which can be found in ibid., pp. 370 -87. 
101. Taylor, Struggle, p. 544. 
102. Sullivan, "Strategy of Decisive Weight," p. 343. 
103. See Albrecht -Carrie, Italy at the Paris Peace Conference; and H. James Burgwyn, The 
Legend of the Mutilated Victory: Italy, the Great War, and the Paris Peace Conference, 1915-1919 (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1993). 
104. Smith, Mussolini's Roman Empi re, p. 60. Also see p. 16. 
105. John F. Coverdale, Italian Intervention in the Spanish Civil War (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1975), pp. 41, 53, 74 -78, 127 -50, 198- 200, 388- 89. 
106. Knox, Mussolini Unleashed, p. 2. 
107. See Mario Cervi, The Hollow Legions: Mussolini's Blunder in Greece, 1940- 1941, trans. 
Eric Mosbacher (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1971); and I.S.O. Playfair, The Mediterranean 
and Middle East, vol. I, The Early Successes against Italy (London: Her Majesty's Stationery 
Office, 1954). 
108. Snyder, Myths of Empire, p. 21. Also see ibid., pp. 1- 3, 61- 62; and Van Evera, Causes 
of War. 
109. Snyder, Myths of Empire, p. 308. 
110. Snyder, for example, maintains in Myths of Empire that the aggressive behavior of 
great powers can be explained largely by "logrolling" among selfish interest groups on the home 
front. Van Evera ascribes their ill -advised behavior to militarism. See Stephen Van Evera, 
Causes of War: Misperception and the Roots of Conflict (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, forthcoming). 
111. See Snyder, Myths of Empire; Van Evera, Causes of War; and Kenneth N. Waltz, 
Theory of International Politics (Reading, MA: Addison- Wesley, 1979). For other evidence of 
this line of argument, see Charles A. Kupchan, The Vulnerability of Empire (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1994). For an excellent summary and critique of this perspective, see Fareed Zakaria, "Realism and Domestic Politics: A Review Essay," International Security 17, No. 1 
(Summer 1992), pp. 177 -98. Also see Chapter 2, note 30, of this book. 
112. Snyder, Myths of Empire, p. 8. 
113. As discussed in Chapter 8, the balancing coalition that defeated Napoleon came 
together in 1813, after the French army that had invaded Russia in 1812 had been routed and 
destroyed. The balancing coalition that ultimately defeated Hitler came together in December 
1941, at roughly the same time that the Red Army was stopping the German blitzkrieg outside 
of Moscow. At that point, a good number of Wehrmacht commanders thought that the war 
against the Soviet Union was already lost. 
114. J. A. Nichols, Germany after Bismarck: The Caprivi Era, 1890- 1894 (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1958); Sidney B. Fay, The Origins of the World War, 2d ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1943), pp. 122 -24; Geiss, German Foreign Policy, chap. 7; and Rich, Hohtein, 
vols. 1 -2, chaps. 23 -35. 
115. Charles Kupchan, who accuses Wilhelmine Germany of causing its own encirclement, 
allows that Germany did not start behav ing aggressively until 1897. Kupchan, Vulnerability of 
Empire, p. 360. However, there is a problem with this argu ment: Germany was encircled by 
France and Russia well before 1897. Thus, according to Kupchan's own timeline, the formation 
of the first and most important leg of the Triple Entente cannot be explained by aggressive 
German behavior. The same problem is found in Snyder, Myths of Empire, pp. 68, 72. 
116. Medlicott, Bismarck, p. 172. Also see ibid., pp. 164 -66, 171- 73; Fuller, Bismarck's 
Diplomacy , passim; Geiss, German Foreign Policy, chaps. 6- 7; Kennan, Decline, chaps. 18- 22; 
and Taylor, Struggle, pp. 317- 19. 
117. Geiss, German Foreign Policy, p. 52. Waller makes the same argument in Bismarck, p. 
118. 
118. This point is the central theme in Paul M. Kennedy, The Rise of the Anglo- German 
Antagonism, 1860- 1914 (London: Alien and Unwin, 1980), esp. chaps. 16, 20. Also see Calleo, 
German Problem Reconsidered; and Chapter 8 of this book. 
119. Hillgruber, Germany, p. 13, is excellent on this point. Even if there had been no 
Moroccan crisis, Russia's defeat by itself would probably have caused the formation of the 
Triple Entente. However, that crisis alone would not have been enough to prompt the United 
Kingdom to join forces with France and Russia. 
120. H errmann, Arming of Europe, chap. 2. 
121. Not only did the United Kingdom fail to give "a clear and timely com mitment in support 
of her allies," but there was also a marked improvement in Anglo- German relations between 
1911 and 1914. See Levy, "Preferences ," p. 168; Scan M. Lynn- Jones, "Detente and 
Deterrence: Anglo -German Relations, 1911 -1914:," International Security 11, No. 2 (Fall 1986), 
pp. 121 -50; Scott D. Sagan, "1914 Revisited: Allies, Offense, and Instability," International 
Security 11, No. 2 (Fal l 1986), pp. 169- 71; and the sources cited in Chapter 8, note 79, of this 
book. Furthermore, Anglo- Russian relations soured somewhat after 1911, raising doubts about 
the viability of the Triple Entente. See Keith Neilson, Britain and the Last Tsar: British Policy and 
Russia, 1894- 1917 (Oxford: Clarendon, 1995), chaps. 10 -11. 
122. For example, Cyril Falls writes, "The Germans had come within an inch of bringing off a 
set plan of great length and ending it with the annihilation of their foes." Falls, The Great War 
(New York: Capricorn, 1959), p. 70. Also see Trevor N. Dupuy, A Genius for War: The German 
Army and General Staff, 1807- 1945 (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice -Hall, 1977), pp. 145- 47; 
Herbert Rosinski, The German Army (New York: Praeger, 1966), pp. 134- 37; and Sagan, 
"1914," pp. 159 -61. 
123. Sagan, "1914," pp. 159- 60. 
124. See Michael C. Desch, When the Third World Matters: Latin America and United States 
Grand Strategy (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993), pp. 39 -44; and Taylor, 
Strug gle, pp. xx, 566- 67. Also see the discussion in Chapter 7, note 60, of this book. 
125. Taylor, Mastery, p. 427. Regarding the balance of power in 1905, see Herrmann, 
Arming of Europe, pp. 40 -47. 
126. There was some sentiment among the German generals in 1905 for launching a 
preventive war, but apparently Field Marshal Alfred von Schlieffen (the chief of the General 
Staff) was not among the advocates. Regardless, the kaiser refused to consider the idea. See 
Geiss, "Origins of the First World War," in Geiss, ed., July 1914, pp. 39 -40; Martin Kitchen, A 
Military History of Germany: From the Eighteenth Century to the Present Day (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1975), pp. 174 -75; and Gerhard Ritter, The Schlieffen Plan: Critique of 
a Myth, trans. Andrew and Eva Wilson (London: Oswald Wolff, 1958), pp. 103- 28. 
127. Hitler emphasized in mid- February 1945, "I had always maintained that we ought at all 
costs to avoid waging war on two fronts." Francois Genoud, ed., The Last Testament of Adolf 
Hitler: The Hitle r-Bormann Documents, February -April 1945, trans. R. H. Stevens (London: 
Cassell, 1961), p. 63. His views on this subject were hardly unusual in post -World War I 
Germany. See Post, Civil- Military Fabric, p. 151. 
128. Hitler told his generals on March 30, 1941, "Now the possibility exists to strike Russia 
with our rear safe; that chance will not soon come again." Quoted in Joachim C. Fest, Hitler, trans. Richard and Clara Winston (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1974), p. 646. 
129. Rich, Hitler's War Aim s, p. xii. Also see Craig, Germany, chap. 19, esp. pp. 677 -78; 
Wolfram Wette, "Ideology, Propaganda, and Internal Politics as Preconditions of the War Policy 
of the Third Reich," in Wilhelm Deist et al., eds., Germany and the Second World War, vol. 1, 
The Build- up of German Aggression, trans. P. S. Falla et al. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1990), pp. 83-
124. 
130. Matthew Cooper and James Lucas, Panzer: The Armoured Force of the Third Reich 
(New York: St. Martin's, 1976), pp. 7- 24; Kenneth Macksey, Guderian: Creator of the Blitzkrieg 
(New York: Stein and Day, 1976), chap. 5; Ernest R. May, Strange Victory: Hitler's Conquest of 
France (New York: Hill and Wang, 2000), pt. 3; John J. Mearsheimer, Conventional Deterrence 
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1983), c hap. 4; and Barry R. Posen, Sources of Military 
Doctrine: France, Britain, and Germany between the World Wars (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1984), chaps. 3, 6. 
131. Haffner, Meaning of Hitler, p. 49. 
132. The phrase is Joachim Pest's, who uses the date 1938 rather than 1940 to make the 
same point. Fest, Hitler, p. 9. 
133. Robert Cecil, Hitler's Decision to Invade Russia (New York: David McKay, 1975), chap. 
8; Matthew Cooper, The German Army, 1933- 1945: Its Political and Military Failure (New York: 
Stein and Day, 1978), chaps. 17 -18; Geyer, "German Strategy," pp. 587 -90; and Barry K. 
Leach, German Strategy against Russia, 1939 -1941 (Oxford: Clarendon, 1973). 
134. Feis, Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin, pp. 9- 10; Waldo Heinrichs, Threshold of War: 
Frankli n D. Roosevelt and American Entry into World War H (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1988), pp. 95, 102- 3; Warren F. Kimball, The Juggler: Franklin Roosevelt as Wartime 
Statesman (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991), p. 15, 21- 41; and William L. 
Langer and S. Bverett Gleason, The Undeclared War, 1940 -1941 (New York: Harper, 1953), 
chap. 17. 
135. See Chapter 8. 
136. All quotes in this paragraph are from Haffner, Meaning of Hitler, pp. 104 -5. 
137. This is a key theme in Akira Iriye, The Origins of the Second World War in Asia and the 
Pacific (London: Longman, 1987). 
138. Dorothy Borg, The United States and the Far Eastern Crisis of 1933 -1938 (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1964); Warren I. Cohen, America's Response to China: An 
Interpret ative History of Sino- American Relations, 2d ed. (New York: John Wiley, 1980), chap. 
5; Warren I. Cohen, The Chinese Connection: Roger S. Greene, Thomas W. Lament, George E. 
Sokolsky, and American- East Asian Relations (New York: Columbia University Press, 1978); 
and Michael Schaller, The United States and China in the Twentieth Century, 2d ed. (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, - 1990), chap. 3. 
139. Paul W. Schroeder, The Axis Alliance and Japanese- American Relations, 1941 (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Pre ss, 1958), pp. 2, 15. Also see Herbert Feis, The Road to Pearl 
Harbor: The Coming of the War between the United States and Japan (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1950), esp. chaps. 5- 6. The Japanese military actually thought little about 
fightin g a war against the United States until 1940. See Michael A. Barnhart, "Japanese 
Intelligence before the Second World War: 'Best Case' Analysis," in Ernest R. May, ed., Knowing One's Enemies: Intelligence Assessment before the Two World Wars (Princeton, NJ : 
Princeton University Press, 1984), pp. 424 -55; and Peattie, Ishiwara Kanji. 
140. About 48 percent of the outside aid flowing into China came across its border with 
Indochina. Another 31 percent came across China's border with Burma (along the famous "Burma Road"). James W. Morley, ed., The Final Confrontation: Japan's Negotiations with the 
United States, 1941, trans. David A. Titus (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994), pp. xx, 
373. 
141. Schroeder, Axis Alliance, p. 46. Also see Iriye, Origins of the Second World War, p. 
140. 
142. The key work on this point is Heinrichs, Threshold of War. Also see Michael A. 
Barnhart, "Historiography, the Origins of the Second World War in Asia and the Pacific: 
Synthesis Impossible?" Diplomatic History 20, No. 2 (Spring 1996), pp. 241- 60; Feis, Road to 
Pearl Harbor; Morley, ed., Final Conf rontation; and Schroeder, Axis Alliance. 
143. On the Soviet Union balancing against Japan, see Coox, Nomonhan, vols. 1 -2; and 
Hata, "The Japanese- Soviet Confrontation." 
144. On the Tripartite Pact, see Chihiro Hosoya, "The Tripartite Pact, 1939 -1940," trans. 
James W. Morley, in Morley, ed., Deterrent Diplomacy, pp. 179 -257. On American knowledge of 
Japanese thinking, see Heinrichs, Threshold of War, chaps. 5 -7. 
145. The United States clearly demanded that Japan exit China and Indochina but was 
ambiguous about Manchuria. Nevertheless, there was good reason for Japan to think that the 
United States would demand that Manchuria also be aban doned. See Feis, Road to Pearl 
Harbor, p. 276; Morley, ed., Final Confrontation, pp. xxviii -xxx, 318, 321- 22; and Schroeder , 
Axis Alliance, pp. 35 -36. 
146. Barnhart, Japan Prepares for Total War, pp. 144- 46. 
147. Iriye, Origins of the Second World War, pp. 148- 50. 
148. Kupchan, Vulnerability of Empire, pp. 339 -50. 
149. Langer and Gleason, Undeclared War, pp. 857, 867. 
150. For a detailed discussion of this point, see Schroeder, Axis Alliance, which should be 
read in conjunction with Heinrichs, Threshold of War, chaps. 4 -7. Heinrichs shows how German 
battlefield successes on the eastern front between June and December 1941 hardened the U.S. 
negotiating position against Japan. 
151. As Heinrichs notes, it is difficult to believe that Roosevelt did not under stand that his 
policies would eventually lead to war between Japan and the United States. Heinrichs, 
Threshold of War, p. 159. 
152. Mark S. Watson, Chief of Staff: Prewar Plans and Operations (Washington, DC: 
Department of the Army, 1950), chaps. 4- 9; and Stephen D. Westbrook, "The Railey Report and 
Army Morale, 1941: Anatomy of a Crisis," Military Review 60, No. 6 (June 1980), pp. 11- 24. 
153. Langer and Gleason, Undeclared War, pp. 570- 74. 
154. Scott D. Sagan, "The Origins of the Pacific War," in Robert I. Rotberg and Theodore K. 
Rabb, eds., The Origin and Prevention of Major Wars (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), p. 324. This same theme is emphasized in Michael E. Brown, Deterrence Failures and 
Deterrence Strategies, RAND Paper 5842 (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, March 
1977), pp. 3- 7; Robert J.C. Butow, To jo and the Coming of the War (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1961), chap. 11; Kupchan, Vulnerability of Empire, p. 344; Bruce M. Russett, 
"Pearl Harbor: Deterrence Theory and Decision Theory," Journal of Peace Research 4, No. 2 
(1967). pp. 89 -105; and Schroeder, Axis Allia nce, pp. 200- 201. Also useful is Nobutaka Ike, ed. 
and trans., Japan's Decision for War: Records of the 1941 Policy Conferences (Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press, 1967). 
155. Among the best sources on U.S. nuclear strategy from 1945 to 1950 are Harr y R. 
Borowski, A Hollow Threat: Strategic Air Power and Containment before Korea (Westport, CT: 
Greenwood, 1982); David Alan Rosenberg, "The Origins of Overkill: Nuclear Weapons and 
American Strategy, 1945 -1960," International Security 7, No. 4 (Spring 198 3), pp. 11- 22; David 
Alan Rosenberg, "American Atomic Strategy and the Hydrogen Bomb Decision," Journal of American History 66, No. 1 (June 1979), pp. 62- 87; Steven T. Ross, American War Plans, 1945-
1950 (New York: Garland, 1988); and Samuel R. Williamson and Steven L. Rearden, The 
Origins of U.S. Nuclear Strategy, 1945- 1953 (New York: St. Martin's, 1993). 
156. Henry S. Rowen, "Formulating Strategic Doctrine," in Report of the Commission on the 
Organization of the Government for the Conduct of Foreign Polic y, Appendix K, Adequacy of 
Current Organization: Defense and Arms Control (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing 
Office, June 1975), p. 222. 
157. Among the best works on massive retaliation are Rosenberg, "Origins of Overkill," pp. 
3-69; Scott D. Sagan, "SIOP -62: The Nuclear War Plan Briefing to President Kennedy," 
International Security 12, No. 1 (Summer 1987), pp. 22 -51; and Samuel F. Wells, Jr., "The 
Origins of Massive Retaliation," Political Science Quarterly 96, No. 1 (Summer 1981), pp. 31 -52. 
158. Quoted in Fred Kaplan, The Wizards of Armageddon (New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1983), p. 134. 
159. See Trachtenberg, Constructed Peace, pp. 100- 101,-123, 156- 58, 179 -83, 293- 97, 
351. Trachtenberg maintains that the United States had nuclear superiori ty from roughly 1953 to 
1963. 
160. See Richard K. Belts, Nuclear Blackmail and Nuclear Balance (Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution Press, 1987), pp. 144 -79; and Scott D. Sagan, Moving Targets: Nuclear 
Strategy and National Security (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1989), pp. 24- 26. 
Between 1949 and 1955, the United States wrestled with the idea of launching a preventive 
strike against the Soviets' incipient nuclear capa bility but always decided that the operation was 
not feasible. See Tami Davis Biddle, "Handling the Soviet Threat: 'Project Control' and the 
Debate on American Strategy in the Early Cold War Years," Journal of Strategic Studies 12, No. 
3 (September 1989), pp. 273- 302; Russell D. Buhite and William C. Hamel, "War for Peace: The 
Quest ion of an American Preventive War against the Soviet Union, 1945 -1955," Diplomatic 
History 14, No. 3 (Summer 1990), pp. 367- 84; Copeland, Origins of Major War, pp. 170 -75; and 
Marc Trachtenberg, "A 'Wasting Asset': American Strategy and the Shifting Nuclear Balance, 
1949- 1954," International Security 13, No. 3 (Winter 1988 -89), pp. 5 -49. 
161. See Kaplan, Wizards, chaps. 12- 18. Also see Lynn Etheridge Davis, Limited Nuclear 
Options: Deterrence and the New American Doctrine, Adelphi Paper No. 121 (London: 
International Institute for Strategic Studies, Winter 1975- 76); Alfred Goldberg, A Brief Survey of 
the Evolution of Ideas about Counterforce, RM -5431- PR (Santa Monica, CA: RAND 
Corporation, October 1967, rev. March 1981); Klaus Knorr and Thornton Read, eds., Limited 
Strategic War (New York: Praeger, 1962); and Marc Trachtenberg, History and Strategy 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991), chap. 1. 
162. On the criteria for assured destruction, see Alain C. Enthoven and K. Wayne Smith, 
How Much Is Enough? Shaping the Defense Program, 1961 -1969 (New York: Harper and Row, 
1971), pp. 174- 75, 207 -10; Milton Leitenberg, "Presidential Directive (PD) 59: United States 
Nuclear Weapons Targeting Policy," Journal of Peace Resear ch 18, No. 4 (1981), pp. 312- 14; 
and Stephen Van Evera, "Analysis or Propaganda? Measuring American Strategic Nuclear 
Capability, 1969- 1988," in Lynn Eden and Steven E. Miller, eds., Nuclear Arguments: 
Understanding the Strategic Nuclear Arms and Arms Cont rol Debates (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1989), pp. 209 -21. 
163. SIOP stands for Single Integrated Operational Plan. The numbers for potential targets 
in this paragraph are from Desmond Ball, "The Development of the SIOP, 1960- 1983," in 
Desmond B all and Jeffrey Richelson, eds., Strategic Nuclear Targeting (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1986), p. 80. 
164. Figures for the size of the U.S. nuclear arsenal are from Robert S. Norris and William 
M. Arkin, "Nuclear Notebook: Estimated U.S. and Soviet/Russian Nuclear Stockpiles, 1945 -94," 
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 50, No. 6 (November -December 1994), p. 59. 
165. Frances FitzGerald, Way Out There in the Blue: Reagan, Star Wars, and the End of the 
Cold War (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2000); and David Goldfischer, The Best Defense: 
Policy Alternatives for U.S. Nuclear Security from the 1950s to the 1990s (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1993). 
166. Among the best sources on American nuclear policy between 1961 and 1990 are 
Desmond Ball, Politics and Force Levels: The Strategic Missile Program of the Kennedy Administration (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980); Ball, "Development of the SIO P"; 
Desmond Ball, "U.S. Strategic Forces: How Would They Be Used?" International Security 7', No. 3 (Winter 1982- 83), pp. 31 -60; Desmond Ball and Robert Toth, "Revising the SIOP: Taking 
War-Fighting to Dangerous Extremes," International Security 14, No. 4 (Spring 1990), pp. 65 -92; 
Aaron L. Friedberg, "A History of U.S. Strategic 'Doctrine' —1945 to 1980," Journal of Strategic 
Studies 3, No. 3 (December 1980), pp. 37- 71; Leitenberg, "Presidential Directive (PD) 59"; Eric 
Mlyn, The State, Society, and Limited Nuclear War (Albany: State University of New York Press, 
1995); Jeffrey Richelson, "PD -59, NSDD- 13 and the Reagan Strategic Modernization Program," 
Journal of Strategic Studies 6, No. 2 (June 1983), pp. 125- 46; Rowen, "Formulating Strategic 
Doctrine," pp. 219 -34; Sagan, Moving Targets; and Walter Slocombe, "The Countervailing 
Strategy," International Security 5, No. 4 (Spring 1981), pp. 18- 27. Fora discussion of why 
limited nuclear options was not a viable strategy, see Chapter 4, note 135, of this book. 
167. They included the Ford administration's SIOP -5 (which took effect January 1, 1976); 
the Carter administration's SIOP -5F (October 1, 1981); the Reagan administration's SIOP -6 
(October 1, 1983); and the George H.W. Bush administration's SIOP -6F (October 1 , 1989). For 
a summary chart describing the differences among these SIOPs, see Ball and Toth, "Revising 
the SIOP," p. 67. 
168. Desmond Ball, a leading expert on the history of American nuclear planning, succinctly 
summarizes American nuclear policy between 1961 and 1990: "Since the early 1960s, the 
overriding objective of U.S. strategic nuclear policy has been the development of a strategic posture designed to enable the United States to control any nuclear exchange in order to limit 
damage at the lowest possible levels while ensuring that the outcomes are favorable to the 
United States." Desmond Ball, "Soviet Strategic Planning and the Control of Nuclear War," in 
Roman Kolkowicz and Ellen P. Mickiewicz, eds., The Soviet Calculus of Nuclear ,War 
(Lexi ngton, MA: D. C. Heath, 1986), p. 49. For evidence that the Soviets thought that the United 
States was deploying counterforce weapons to gain military advantage, see Henry A. 
Trofimenko, "Illusion of a Panacea," International Security 5, No. 4 (Spring 198 1), pp. 28 -48. All 
the emphasis on limited nuclear options notwithstanding, "the doctrine of the overwhelming 
massive strike still had a strong hold" in some quarters of the U.S. national security 
establishment. Rowen, "Formulating Strategic Doctrine," p. 233. Given that the Soviet Union 
rejected the notion of fight ing limited nuclear wars and instead favored massive nuclear strikes 
against the United States (see the next section of this chapter), this residual interest in massive 
retaliation is not surpr ising. 
169. During the late 1960s and throughout much of the 1970s, it was fash ionable on both 
the right and the left to argue that the United States had abandoned counterforce targeting and 
adopted a straightforward MAD strategy in its place. Senator Mal colm Wallop (R -Wyo.), for 
example, wrote in 1979 that "over the past fifteen years, at least four American Presidents, and 
their leading defense advisers, have built weapons and cast strategic plans well nigh exclusively 
for the purpose of inflicting damag e upon the enemy's society." Malcolm Wallop, "Opportunities 
and Imperatives of Ballistic Missile Defense," Strategic Review 7, No. 4 (Fall 1979), p. 13. It is 
now well established among students of the nuclear arms race that this claim is a groundless 
myth perpetrated by experts and policymakers who surely knew better. The seminal piece 
exposing this myth is Desmond Ball, Deja Vu: The Return to Counterforce in the Nixon 
Administration (Santa Monica: California Seminar on Arms Control and Foreign Policy, 
December 1974). Also see Leitenberg, "Presidential Directive (PD) 59"; Mlyn, The State: and 
Rowen, "Formulating Strategic Doctrine." 
170. Henry Rowen writes, "Over the years the number of weapons in both the U.S. and 
Soviet forces has increased enormously, as has the number of targets assigned to these 
weapons, but the number of urban- industrial targets . . . has increased little." Rowen, 
"Formulating Strategic Doctrine," p. 220. As discussed later in t his section, Soviet strategists did 
not emphasize the concept of assured destruction, and therefore they did not spell out criteria for achieving that mission. However, based on U.S. criteria, the Soviets faced roughly the same 
task con fronting the United States. Specifically, they had to destroy the 200 largest American 
cities, which contain about 33 percent of the U.S. population and 75 per cent of the industrial 
base. That task probably could have been accomplished with 400 EMT, if not half that number. 
See Ashton B. Carter, "BMD Applications: Performance and Limitations," in Ashton B. Carter 
and David N. Schwartz, eds., Ballistic Missile Defense (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution 
Press, 1984), pp. 103, 163, 168 -69. 
171. All numbers in this paragraph are from Norris and Arkin, "Nuclear Notebook," p. .59. 
For a detailed description of the growth and evolution of the Soviet nuclear arsenal, see Robert 
P. Berman and John C. Baker, Soviet Strategic Forces: Requirements and Responses 
(Washington, DC: Brook ings Institution Press, 1982). 
172. Robert L. Arnett, "Soviet Attitudes towards Nuclear War: Do They Really Think They 
Can Win?" Journal of Strategic Studies 2, No. 2 (September 1979), pp. 172- 91; Ball, "Soviet 
Strategic Planning"; David Holloway, The Sovi et Union and the Arms Race (New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 1983), chap. 3; Benjamin Lambeth, "Contemporary Soviet Military Policy," in Kolkowicz and Mickiewicz, eds., Soviet Calculus of Nuclear War, pp. 25- 48; William 
T. Lee, "Soviet Nuclear Targeti ng Strategy," in Ball and Richelson, eds., Nuclear Targeting, pp. 
84-108; and Richard Pipes, "Why the Soviet Union Thinks It Could Fight and Win a Nuclear 
War," Commentary 64, No. 1 (July 1977), pp. 21 -34. 
173. See Benjamin S. Lambeth, "Uncertainties for t he Soviet War Planner," International 
Security 7', No. 3 (Winter 1982- 83), pp. 139- 66. 
174. Benjamin S. Lambeth, Selective Nuclear Options in American and Soviet Strategic 
Policy, R-2034- DDRE (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, December 1976); and Jack L. 
Snyder, The Soviet Strategic Culture: Implications for Limited Nuclear Options, R -2154 -AF 
(Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, September 1977). 
175. Robert Jervis, for example, has written a book titled The Illogic of American Nuclear 
Strategy (Ithaca, NY : Cornell University Press, 1984). 
176. See note 159 in this chapter. 
177. One author estimates that the ratio of conventional to nuclear spending in the U.S. 
defense budget was roughly 1.45:1 in 1961, 4:1 in 1971, and 6.7:1 in 1981. See William W. 
Kaufmann, A Reasonable Defense (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1986), p. 21. 
Also see Ball, Politics and Force Levels, chap. 6; and Chapter 4, note 141, of this book. 
178. Robert A. Pape, "Technological Sources of War and Peace," manuscript, April 2001. 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER NINE 
 
1. G. Lowes Dickinson, The European Anarchy (New York: Macmillan, 1916), p. 
14. 
2. To the best of my knowledge, no existing theory has the capability to predict exactly when 
war will occur. 
3. For an excellent survey of the causes of war literature, see Jack S. Levy, "The Causes of 
War and the Conditions of Peace," Annual Review of Political Science 1 (1998), pp. 139- 65. 
Also see Dale C. Copeland, The Origins of Major War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
2000), chap. 1; Stephen Van Evera, Causes of War: Power and the Roots of Conflict (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1999), chap. 1; and Kenneth N. Waltz, Man, the State and War: A Theoretical Analysis (New York: Columbia University Press, 1959). 
4. Karl W. Deutsch and J. David Singer, "Multipolar Power Systems and International 
Stability," World Politics 16, No. 3 (April 1964), pp. 390 -406; Kenneth N. Waltz, "The Stability of 
a Bipolar World," Daedalus 93, No. 3 (Summer 1964), pp. 881- 909; and Kenneth N. Waltz, 
Theory of International Politics (Reading, MA: Addison- Wesley, 1979), chap. 8. Also see Robert 
Jervis, System Effects: Complexity in Political and Social Life (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1997), chap. 3. 
5. Robert Gilpin, War and Change in World Poliics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1981); Hans Morgenthau, Politics among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace, 5th ed. 
(New York: Knopf, 1973); and A.F.K. Organski, World P olitics, 2d ed. (New York: Knopf, 1968), 
chap. 14. 
6. For a more complete definition of a potential hegemon, see Chapter 2. 
7. Among the key works on bipolarity and multipolarity are the sources cited in note 4 of this 
chapter; Thomas J. Christensen and Jack Snyder, "Chain Gangs and Passed Bucks: Predicting 
Alliance Patterns in Multipolarity," International Organization 44, No. 2 (Spring 1990), pp. 137-
68; and Richard N. Rosecrance, "Bipolarity, Multipolarity, and the Future," Journal of Conflict 
Resolution 10, No. 3 (September 1966), pp. 314- 27. 
8. Although a balance of power is more likely to produce deterrence than is an imbalance of 
power, balanced power does not guarantee that deterrence will work. As discussed in Chapter 
3, states sometimes design innovative military strate gies that allow them to win wars, even 
though they have no advantage in the size and quality of their fighting forces. Furthermore, the 
broader political forces that move states toward war sometimes force leaders to pursue highly 
risky military strategies, impelling states to challenge opponents of equal or even superior 
strength. See John J. Mearsheimer, Conventional Deterrence (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1983), esp. chap. 2. 
9. A second argument is sometimes made to support the claim that power dis parities are 
more common in multipolarity than in bipolarity. States in multipolar ity facing a more powerful 
adversary are likely to pursue buck -passing, which usually means that they are content to live 
with an imbalance of po wer, because they believe that another state will deal with the threat. 
But even when states bal ance in multipolarity, they are often tempted to seek security through 
alliances rather than by building up their own strength. External balancing of this sort is 
attractive because it is cheaper than the alternative. Nevertheless, it leaves the original power 
imbalance largely intact and hence leaves in place the dangers that such a power gap creates. 
The number two state in a bipolar system, on the other hand, can hope to balance against the leader only by mobilizing its own resources, since it has no great -power alliance partners or 
buck -catchers. Internal balancing of this sort is likely to produce a rough balance of power 
between the opposing great pow ers. In fact, I made this argument in John J. Mearsheimer, 
"Back to the Future: Instability in Europe after the Cold War," International Security 15, No. 1 
(Summer 1990), pp. 13 -19. But there are two problems with this line of argument. As Dale 
Copeland notes, it contradicts my claim that states maximize their share of world power. If 
states are power maximizers, they are not going to tolerate imbalances of power that they have 
the capability to rectify. See Dale C. Copeland, "The Myth of Bipolar Stability: Tow ard a New 
Dynamic Realist Theory of Major War," Security Studies 5, No. 3> (Spring 1996), pp. 38 -47. 
Furthermore, while there is no question that buck -passing is a popular option among threatened 
states in multipolarity (see Chapter 8), buck -passing is mos t likely to succeed if the threatened 
state also builds formidable military forces and erases any power gap that might exist between it 
and the aggressor (see Chapter 5). 
10. There is one exception to this general point: if there were only three great powers in a 
multipolar system, two of them could gang up on the third, and there would be no allies 
available for the victim state. 
11. Balancing coalitions are most likely to form when there is a potential hegemon that can 
be contained only by the joint effor ts of all the threatened great powers. But as discussed in the 
next section, war is highly likely when there is a potential hegemon in a multipolar system. 
12. This point is the central theme of Waltz, "Stability of a Bipolar World." Also see Geoffrey 
Blainey, The Causes of War (New York: Free Press, 1973), chap. 3. 
13. The claim that multipolarity is more stable than bipolarity is often based on the belief that 
as the number of states in a system increases, the amount of atten tion that states can focus on 
each other diminishes, because other states demand attention as well. See, for example, 
Deutsch and Singer, "Multipolar Power Systems," pp. 396 -400. This claim, however, assumes 
rough equality in the size and strength of the relevant actors. But in multipolar systems with a potential hegemon, the other great powers are surely going to pay an inordinate amount of 
attention to that especially powerful state, largely vitiating the claim that multipolarity means 
"limited attention capability." 
14. To review my criteria for selecting great powers, see Chapter 1, note 7. 
15. See Chapter 6. 
16. Jack S. Levy, War in the Modern Great Power System, 1495- 1975 (Lexington: University 
Press of Kentucky, 1983), chap. 3. 
17. The other great -power wars that are excluded bec ause they involve a non- European 
state include the Anglo- Persian War (1856- 57), the Franco -Mexican War (1862- 67), the Sino-
French War (1883 -85), the Sino- Soviet War (1929), the Italo- Ethiopian War (1935- 36), the 
Soviet -Japanese War (1939), and the Sinai Wa r (1956). 
18. Levy uses the term "general war" instead of "central war," whereas Copeland refers to 
these conflicts as "major wars." See Copeland, Origins, pp. 27- 28; and Levy, War, pp. 3, 52, 75. 
Others refer to them as "hegemonic wars," because they usually involve a state that is 
attempting to dominate the entire system. 
19. See Chapter 8. 
20. Although the Russian army was more than twice as large as the Austrian and French 
armies, it had significant qualitative deficiencies, which became more acute over time and 
account in good part for Russia's defeat by the United Kingdom and France in the Crimean War 
(1853- 56). See John S. Curtiss, The Russian Army under Nicholas 1,1825- 1855 (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 1965); and William C. Fuller, J r., Strategy and Power in Russia, 1600 -
1914 (New York: Free Press, 1992), chaps. 6 -7. On the Austrian army, see Istvan Deak, 
Beyond Nationalism: A Social and Political History of the Habsburg Officer Corps, 1848- 1918 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992) , pp. 29 -41; and Gunther E. Rothenberg, The Army of 
Francis Joseph (West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press, 1976), chaps. 1 -4. On the French 
army, see Paddy Griffith, Military Thought in the French Army, 1815 -1851 (Manchester, UK: 
Manchester Universit y Press, 1989); and Douglas Porch, Army and Revolution, 1815 -1848 
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1974). 
21. See Chapter 8. 
22. See Chapter 8. 
23. See Chapter 8. 
CHAPTER TEN 
 
1. William J. Clinton, "American Foreign Policy and the Democratic Ideal," cam paign 
speech, Pabst Theater, Milwaukee, WI, October 1, 1992; "In Clinton's Words: 'Building Lines of Partnership and Bridges to the Future,' " New York Times, July 10, 1997. Rhetoric aside, 
Clinton's foreign policy was largely consistent with the predictions of realism. See Stephen M. Walt, "Two Cheers for Clinton's Foreign Policy," Foreign Affairs 79, No. 2 (March- April 2000), 
pp. 63 -79. 
2. See the sources cited in Chapter 1, note 25. 
3. See Joseph Grieco, "Anarchy and the Limits of Cooperation: A Realist Critique of the 
Newest Liberal Institutionalism," International Organization 42, No. 3 (Summer 1988), pp. 485-507; Stephen D. Krasner, "Global Communications and National Power: Life on the Pareto 
Frontier," World Politics 43, No. 3 (April 1991), pp. 336 -66; John J. Mearsheimer, "The False 
Promise of International Institutions," International Security 19, No. 3 (Winter 1994 -95), pp. 5 -49; 
John J. Mearsheimer, "A Realist Reply," International Security 20, No. 1 (Summer 1995), pp. 
82-93; and Baldev Raj Nayer, "Regimes, Power, and International Aviation," International 
Organization 49, No. 1 (Winter 1995), pp. 139 -70. It is worth noting that in a recent survey of the 
international institutions literature by two prominent institutional -ists, little evidence is p rovided 
that institutions have caused states to alter their behavior in fundamental ways. See Lisa L. 
Martin and Beth A. Simmons, "Theories and Empirical Studies of International Institutions," 
International Organization 52, No. 4 (Autumn 1998), pp. 729- 57. 
4. Tony Evans and Peter Wilson, "Regime Theory and the English School of International 
Relations: A Comparison," Millennium: Journal of International Studies 21, No. 3 (Winter 
1992), p. 330. Also see Lloyd Gruber, Ruling the World: Power Politics and the Rise of 
Supranational Institutions (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000). 
5. Prominent examples of this perspective include Philip G. Cerny, "Globalization and the 
Changing Logic of Collective Action," I nternational Organization 49, No. 4 (Autumn 1995), pp. 
595-625; William Greider, One World, Ready or Not: The Manic Logic of Global Capitalism 
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1997); Kenichi Ohmae, The End of the Nation State: The Rise of Regional Economies (New York: Free Press, 1996); Saskia Sassen, Losing Control? 
Sovereignty in an Age of Globalization (New York: Columbia University Press, 1995); and 
Walter B. Wriston, The Twilight of Sovereignty: How the Information Revolution is Transforming 
Our World (New York: Scribner's, 1992). 
6. Susan Strange, The Retreat of the State: The Diffusion of Power in the World Economy 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), p. 4. 
7. See Richard J. Barnet and John Cavanagh, Global Dreams: Imperial Corporations and 
the New World Order (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1994); and David C. Korten, When 
Corporations Rule the World (West Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press, 1995). Similar claims about 
the dominating influence of multinational cor porations were heard in the 1970s. See Raymond 
Vernon, Sovereignty at Bay: The Multinational Spread of U.S. Enterprises (New York: Basic 
Books, 1971). For the case against Vernon, see Robert Gilpin, U.S. Power and the Multinational 
Corporation: The Political Economy of Foreign Direct Investment (New York: Basic Books, 
1975). 
8. See Paul Hirst and Grahame Thompson, Globalization in Question: The International 
Economy and the Possibilities of Governance, 2d ed. "(Cambridge: Polity Press, 1999); Janice 
E. Thomson and Stephen D. Krasner, "Global Transactions and the Consolidation of Sovereignty," in Ernst -Otto Czerripiel and James N. Rosenau, eds., Global Changes and 
Theoretical Challenges: Approaches to World Politics for the 1990s (Lexington, MA: Lexing ton 
Books, 1989), pp. 195- 219; and Robert Wade, "Globalization and Its Limits: Reports of the 
Death of the National Economy Are Greatly Exaggerated," in Suzanne Berger and Ronald Dore, 
eds., National Diversity and Global Capitalism (Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni versity Press, 1996), pp. 
60-88. 
9. See Paul N. Doremus et al., The Myth of the Global Corporation (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1998); Geoffrey Garrett, "Global Markets and National Politics; Collision 
Course or Virtuous Circle?" International. Organization 52, No. 4 (Autumn 1998), pp. 787 -824; 
Eric Helleiner, States and the Reemergence of Global Finance: From Bretton Woods to the 
1990s (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1994); Ethan B. Kapstein, Governing the Global 
Economy: International Finance and the State (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994); Stephen D. Krasner, Sovereignty: Organized Hypocrisy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1999); Steven K. Vogel, Freer Markets, More Rules: Regulatory Reform in Advanced Indus trial Countries (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996); Linda Weiss, The 
Myth of the Powerless State (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1998); and "The Future of 
the State," Economist, Special Supplement, September 20, 1997. 
10. These points are clearly reflected in almost all the seminal works on nationalism. See, 
for example, Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origins and Spread of Nationalism, rev. ed. (London: Verso, 1991); Walker Connor, Ethnonationalism (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993); Ernest Gellner, Nations and Nationalism (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 1983); and Anthony D. Smith, The Ethnic Origins of Nations (New 
York: Blackwell, 1989). 
11. All quotes in this paragraph are from Suzanne Daley, "French Leader, in Berlin, Urges a 
Fast Track to Unity in Europe," New York Times, June 28, 2000. Also see Suzanne Daley, 
"French Premier Opposes German Plan for Europe," New York Times, May 29, 2001; and William A. Hay, "Quiet Quake in Europe: The French and the Germans Divide," Foreign Policy 
Research Institute's Watch on the West 1, No. 9 (October 2000). 
12. John Mueller, Retreat from Doomsday: The Obsolescence of Major War (New York: 
Basic Books, 1989). Also see Michael Mandelbaum, "Is Major Wa r Obsolete?" Survival W, No. 
4 (Winter 1998- 99), pp. 20- 38. 
13. See the works cited in Chapter 1, note 24. 
14. Christopher Layne, "Kant or Cant: The Myth of the Democratic Peace," International 
Security 19, No. 2 (Fall 1994), pp. 5- 49. Other key works challenging democratic peace theory 
include Michael E. Brown, Sean M. Lynn- Jones, and Steven E. Miller, eds., Debating the 
Democratic Peace (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996), pts. 2 -3; Miriam Fendius Elman, ed., 
Paths to Peace: Is Democracy the Answer? (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997); Miriam Fendius 
Elman, "The Never -Ending Story: Democracy and Peace," International Studies Review 1, No. 3 
(Fall 1999), pp. 87- 103; andJoanne Gowa, Ballots and Bullets: The Elus ive Democratic Peace 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999). 
15. For evidence of backsliding, see Samuel P. Huntington, The Third Wave: 
Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1991), 
chaps. 5 -6; and J uan J. Linz and Alfred Stepan, eds., The Breakdown of Democratic Regimes: 
Crisis, Breakdown, and Reequilibration (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978). 
16. Markus Fischer, in "The Liberal Peace: Ethical, Historical, and Philosophical Aspect s," 
BCSIA Discussion Paper 2000- 07 (Cambridge, MA: John F. Kennedy School of Government, 
Harvard University, April 2000), discusses the dif ficulty of creating and sustaining liberal 
democracy around the world. 
17. The key work in this genre is Alexander W endt, Social Theory of International Politics 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999). For other important social constructivist tracts, 
see the sources cited in Mearsheimer, "False Promise," p. 37 (n. 128). Also see Peter J. 
Katzenstein, ed., The Cu lture of National Security: Norms and Identity in World Politics (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1996); John G. Ruggie, Constructing the World Polity: Essays 
on International Institutionalization (New York: Routledge, 1998); and John G. Ruggie, "What 
Makes the World Hang Together? Neo- Utilitarianism and the Social Constructivist Challenge," 
International Organization 52, No. 4 (Autumn 1998), pp. 855- 85. 
18. Alexander Wendt, "Anarchy Is What States Make of It: The Social Construction of Power 
Politics, " International Organization 46, No. 2 (Spring 1992), pp. 391- 425. 
19. For further elaboration of my critique of social constructivism, see Mearsheimer, "False 
Promise," pp. 37 -47; and Mearsheimer, "Realist Reply," pp. 90 -92. 
20. See the works cited in Chapter 6, note 86. 
21. For Gorbachev's views, see Mikhail Gorbachev, Perestroika: New Thinking for Our 
Country and the World (New York: Harper and Row, 1987). 
22. See the sources listed in Chapter 1, note 23. 
23. See inter alia Katherine Barbieri, "Economic Interdependence: A Path to Peace or a 
Source of Interstate Conflict?" Journal of Peace Research 33, No. 1 (February 1996), pp. 29- 49; 
Barry Buzan, "Economic Structure and International Security: The Limits of the Liberal Case," 
International Organization 38, No. 4 (Autumn 1984), pp. 597- 624; Dale C. Copeland, "Economic 
Interdependence and War: A Theory of Trade Expectations," International Security 20, No. 4 
(Spring 1996), pp. 5- 41; Norrin M. Ripsman and Jean- Marc P. Blanchard, "Commercial 
Liberalism under Fire: Evidence from 1914 and 1936," Security Studies 6, No. 2 (Winter 1996-
97), pp. 4- 50; David M. Rowe, "World Economic Expansion and National Security in Pre -World 
War I Europe," International Organization 53, No. 2 (Spring 1999), pp. 195 -231; and Kenneth N. 
Waltz, "The Myth of National Interdependence," in Charles P. Kindelberger, ed., The 
International Corporation (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1970 ), pp. 205 -23. 
24. Paul Dibb, David D. Hale, and Peter Prince, "Asia's Insecurity," Survival41, No. 3 
(Autumn 1999), pp. 5- 20. Also see Robert A. Manning and James J. Przystup, "Asia's Transition 
Diplomacy: Hedging against Futureshock," Survival 41, No. 3 (Autumn 1999), pp. 43- 67. For a 
discussion of the fragility of the contemporary world economy, see Robert Gilpin, Global 
Capitalism: The World Economy in the 21st Century (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2000). 
25. See "The Glaspie- Transcript: Saddam Meets the U.S. Ambassador," in Micah L. Sifry 
and Christopher Cerf, eds., The Gulf War Reader: History, Documents, Opinions (New York: 
Times Books, 1991), pp. 122- 33. 
26. For examples of this perspective, see Hilary French, Vanishing Borders: Protec ting the 
Planet in the Age of Globalization (New York: Norton, 2000); Carl Kaysen, Robert A. Pastor, 
and Laura W. Reed, eds., Collective Responses to Regional Problems: The Case of Latin 
America and the Caribbean (Cambridge, MA: American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 1994); 
Ronnie D. Lipschutz and Ken Conca, eds., The State and Social Power in Global Environmental 
Politics (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993); Ronnie D. Lipschutz, "Reconstructing 
World Politics: The Emergence of Global Civil Society, " Millennium: Journal of International 
Studies 21, No. 3 (Winter 1992), pp. 389- 420; Jessica Tuchman Matthews, ed., Preserving the 
Global Environment: The Challenge of Shared Leadership (New York: Norton, 1991); Paul 
Wapner, Environmental Activism and Worl d Civic Politics (Albany: State University of New York 
Press, 1996); and World Commission on Environment and Development, Our Common Future 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987). 
27. See Julian L. Simon, ed., The State of Humanity (Cambridge, MA: Blackwe ll, 1995); and 
Julian L. Simon, The Ultimate Resource 2 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996). 
28. See Nazli Choucri and Robert C. North, Nations in Conflict: National Growth and 
International Violence (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1975); Will iam H. Durham, Scarcity and 
Survival in Central America: Ecological Origins of the Soccer War (Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press, 1979); Peter H. Gleick, "Water and Conflict: Fresh Water Resources and 
International Security," International Security 1 8, No. 1 (Summer 1993), pp. 79 -112; Thomas F. 
Homer -Dixon, Environment, Scarcity, and Violence (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1999); and Arthur H. Westing, ed., Global Resources and International Conflict: Environmental 
Factors in Strategic Policy and Action (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986). 
29. Karl W. Deutsch et al., Political Community and the North Atlantic Area: International 
Organization in the Light of Historical Experience (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1957), pp. 5- 9. 
30. lan Fisher and Norimitsu Onishi, "Many Armies Ravage Rich Land in the 'First World 
War' of Africa," New York Times, February 6, 2000. 
31. See, for example, the many articles on Asian security published over the past decade in 
Foreign Affairs, International Security, and Survival. Some of the best pieces from International 
Security are published in Michael E. Brown, Sean M. Lynn- Jones, and Steven E. Miller, eds., 
East Asian Security (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996). 
32. See Leon V. Sigal, Disarming Strangers: Nuclear Diplomacy with North Korea 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998); and Don Oberdorfer, The Two Koreas: A 
Contemporary History (New York: Basic Books, 1997), chaps. 11 -13. 
33. For the best net assessments of the military balance on the Korean Peninsula, see Nick 
Beldecos and Eric Heginbotham, "The Conventional Military Balance in Korea," Breakthroughs 
4, No. 1 (Spring 1995), pp. 1 -8; and Michael O'Hanlon, "Stopping a North K orean Invasion: Why 
Defending South Korea Is Easier Than the Pentagon Thinks, " International Security 22, No. 4 
(Spring 1998), pp. 135- 70. 
34. On the Taiwan problem, see Bernice Lee, The Security Implications of the New Taiwan, 
Adelphi Paper No. 331 (London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, October 1999); James R. Lilley and Chuck Downs, eds., Crisis in the Taiwan Strait (Washington, DC: National 
Defense University Press, 1997); Denny Roy, "Tension in the Taiwan Strait," Survival 42, No. 1 
(Spring 2000), pp. 76- 96; Andrew Scobell, "Show of Force: The PLA and the 1995- 1996 Taiwan 
Strait Crisis," discus sion paper (Stanford, CA: Asia/Pacific Research Center, Stanford 
University, January 1999); and Suisheng Zhao, ed., Across the Taiwan Strait: Mai nland China, 
Taiwan, and the 1995 -1996 Crisis (New York: Routledge, 1999). 
35. Taiwan Affairs Office and the Information Office of the State Council, People's Republic 
of China, "The One -China Principle and the Taiwan Issue," February 21, 2000. 
36. In response to China's white paper, the U.S. undersecretary of defense warned China 
that it would face "incalculable consequences" if it attacked Taiwan. Steven Mufson and Helen Dewar, "Pentagon Issues Warning to China: U.S. Officials Criticize Beijing White Paper Backing 
Use of Force against Taiwan," Washington Post, February 23, 2000. Shortly thereafter, China's 
official military newspaper empha sized that China "is a country that has certain abilities of 
launching strategic coun terattack and the capacity of launching a long -distance strike." Bill 
Gertz, "China Threatens U.S. with Missile Strike," Washington Times, February 29, 2000. China 
made a similar threat in January 1996. See Patrick E. Tyler, "China Threatens Taiwan, It Makes 
Sure U.S. Listens," New York Times, January 24- , 1996. 
37. Thomas J. Christensen, "Chinese Realpolitik," Foreign Affairs 75, No. 5 (September -
October 1996), p. 37. Also see Alastair lain Johnston, Cultural Realism: Strategic Culture and Grand Strategy in Chinese History (Princeton, NJ : Princeton University Press, 1995); and 
Andrew J. Nathan and Robert S. Ross, The Great Wall and the Empty Fortress: China's Search for Security (New York: Norton, 1997). 
38. Mark J. Valencia, China and the South China Sea Disputes, Adelphi Paper No. 298 
(London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, October 1995). 
39. Yu Bin, "Containment by Stealth: Chinese Views of and Policies toward America's 
Alliances with Japan and Korea after the Cold War," discussion paper (Stanford, CA: Asia/Pacific Resea rch Center, Stanford University, September 1999), p. 5. Also see Richard 
Bernstein and Ross H. Munro, "China I: The Coming Conflict with America," Foreign Affairs 76, No. 2 (March- April 1997), pp. 18 -32; Thomas J. Christensen, "China, the U.S. -Japan Alliance, 
and the Security Dilemma in East Asia," International Security 23, No. 4 (Spring 1999), pp. 49 -
80; Christensen, "Chinese Realpolitik," pp. 37 -52; Michael Pillsbury, China Debates the Future 
Security Environment (Washington, DC: National Defense Univers ity Press, 2000); David 
Shambaugh, "China's Military Views the World: Ambivalent Security," International Security24, 
No. 3 (Winter 1999- 2000), pp. 52- 79; Alien S. Whiting, China Eyes Japan (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1989); and Jianwei Wang and Xinbo Wu, "Against Us or with Us? The 
Chinese Perspective of America's Alliances with Japan and Korea," discussion paper (Stanford, CA: Asia/Pacific Research Center, Stanford University, May 1998). 
40. Bin, "Containment by Stealth," p. 7; and David Shambaugh, "Sino- American Strategic 
Relations: From Partners to Competitors," Survival 42, No. 1 (Spring 2000), pp. 97 -115. 
41. See Yoichi Funabashi, "Japan and the New World Order," Foreign Affairs 70, No. 5 
(Winter 1991 -92), pp. 58 -74. 
42. Michael J. Green, "The Forgotten Player," National Interest, No. 60 (Summer 2000), pp. 
44-45. Also see Benjamin L. Self, "Japan's Changing China Policy," Survival 38, No. 2 (Summer 
1996), pp. 35- 58; and Gerald Segal, "T he Coming Confrontation between China and Japan?" 
World Policy Journal 10, No. 2 (Summer 1993), pp. 27 -32. 
43. On Chinese military weakness, see Bates Gill and Michael O'Hanlon, "China's Hollow 
Military," National Interest, No. 56 (Summer 1999), pp. 55 -62; Robert S. Ross, "China II: Beijing 
as a Conservative Power," Foreign Affairs 76, No. 2 (March- April 1997), pp. 33 -44; and Gerald 
Segal, "Does China Matter?" Foreign Affairs 78, No. 5 (September -October 1999), pp. 24- 36. 
For a contrasting view, see James Lilley and Carl Ford, "China's Military: A Second Opinion," National Interest, No. 57 (Fall 1999), pp. 71- 77. Thomas Christensen argues that China will 
have the capability to challenge American interests in Asia even if it remains a relatively weak 
military power. See Christensen, "Posing Problems without Catching Up: China's Rise and 
Challenges for U.S. Security Policy," International Security 25, No. 4 (Spring 2001), pp. 5 -40. 
44. See John Pomfret, "China Plans Major Boost in Defense Spending for Military, " 
Washington Post, March 6,2001. Also see James C. Mulvenon and Richard H. Yang, eds., The 
People's Liberation Army in the Information Age (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1999); 
Mark A. Stokes, China's Strategic Modernization: Implications for the Uni ted States (Carlisle 
Barracks, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, 1999); and Michael Swaine, 
"Chinese Military Modernization and Asian Security," discussion paper (Stanford, CA: 
Asia/Pacific Research Center, Stanford University, August 1998). 
45. Paul Bracken, Fire in the East: The Rise of Asian Military Power and the Second Nuclear 
Age (New York: HarperCollins, 1999). For more general discussions of the arms buildup in the 
region see Kent E. Calder, Asia's Deadly Triangle: How Arms, Energy and Growth Threaten to 
Destabilize the Asia- Pacific . London: Nicholas Brealey, 1997); and Tim Huxley and Susan 
Willett, Arming East Asia, Adelphi Paper No. 329 (London: International Institute of Strategic 
Studies, July 1999). 
46. The phrase "primed for peace" was coined by Stephen Van Bvera to describe post -Cold 
War Europe. See Stephen Van Evera, "Primed for Peace: Europe after the Cold War," 
International Security 15, No. 3 (Winter 1990 -91), pp. 7 -57. 
47. Joseph S. Nye, Jr., " East Asian Security: The Case for Deep Engagement," Foreign 
Affairs 74, No. 4 (July -August 1995), pp. 90- 102. The quotes in this para graph are from pp. 90-
91, 102. Also see Department of Defense, United States Security Strategy for the East Asia-
Pacific Region (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense, February 1995); and Department 
of Defense, The United States Security Strategy for the East Asia- Pacific Region: 1998 
(Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense, November 1998). This perspective enjoys wi de 
support on both sides of the Pacific. See, for example, United States Commission on National 
Security/21st Century, New World Coming: American Security "in the 21st Century, Phase I 
Report (Washington, DC: U.S. Commission on National Security, September 15, 1999), p. 82. 
One notable exception is Chalmers Johnson and E. B. Keehn, "East Asian Security: The 
Pentagon's Ossified Strategy," Foreign Affairs 74, No. 4 (July -August 1995); pp. 103- 14. 
48. The argument that the United States can serve as a "pacifie r" in regions such as Europe 
and Northeast Asia was first laid out in Josef Joffe, "Europe's American Pacifier," Foreign 
Policy, No. 54 (Spring 1984), pp. 64-82. 
49. Gorbachev, Perestroika, pp. 194 -95. 
50. The document was originally published in Nezavisim oye Voennoye Obozreniye on 
January 14, 2000. For key translated excerpts, from which this quote is taken, see "Russia's 
National Security Concept," Arms Control Today 30, No. 1 (January -February 2000), pp. 15- 20. 
For a discussion of the evolution of Russian thinking about security during the 1990s, see Celeste A. Wallander, "Wary of the West: Russian Security Policy at the Millennium," Arms 
Control Today 30, No. 2 (March 2000), pp. 7- 12. It should be emphasized, however, that 
rhetoric aside, Russia has been acting like a traditional great power since the early 1990s. See 
the sources cited in Mearsheimer, "False Promise," p. 46 (n. 175, 176). 
51. See Serge Schmemann, "Russia Drops Pledge of No First Use of Atom Arms," New 
York Times, November 4, 1993. NATO, w hich has always rejected a no- first-use policy 
regarding nuclear weapons, remains firmly wedded to that policy. For example, the "NATO 
Alliance Strategic Concept," which was approved by the North Atlantic Council on April 24, 
1999, states that "the Allianc e's conventional forces alone cannot ensure credible deterrence. 
Nuclear weapons make a unique contribution in rendering the risks of aggression against the 
Alliance incalculable and unacceptable. Thus they remain essential to preserve peace. . . . They 
demon strate that aggression of any kind is not a rational option." 
52. Russian public opinion polls from November 1999 show that 85 percent of the 
population believe that Russia must once again become a "great empire." Only 7 percent 
disagree. Michael Wines , "Russia Pines for a New Savior: Victory," New York Times, November 
21, 1999, Sec. 4. 
53. William J. Clinton, "Commencement Address," United States Military Academy, West 
Point, NY, May 31, 1997. 
54. Madeleine Albright, prepared statement before the U.S. Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee, Washington, DC, January 8, 1997. 
55. Robert J. Art, "Why Western Europe Needs the United States and NATO," Political 
Science Quarterly 111, No. 1 (Spring 1996), pp. 5- 6. The views of Christoph Bertram, a former 
director of the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London and one of Germany's 
foremost strategic thinkers, are also instructive on this point. He wrote in 1995 that "to disband 
NATO now would throw Europe into deep insecurity. ... It would be a strat egic disaster." He 
goes on to say that "if the United States turned its back on Europe, NATO would collapse and 
the European Union would be strained to the point of disintegration. Germany would stand out 
as the dominant power in the West of the continent, and Russia as the disturbing power in the 
East. The United States would lose much of its international authori ty as well as the means to 
help prevent European instability from igniting interna tional conflict once again." Bertram, 
Europe in the Balance: Securing the Peace Won in the Cold War (Washington, DC: Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace, 1995), pp. 17- 18, 85. Also see pp. 10 -11. 
56. Regarding their views on the obsolescence of great -power war in Europe, see Robert J. 
Art, "A Defensible Defen se: America's Grand Strategy after the Cold War," International Security 
15, No. 4 (Spring 1991), pp. 45 -46; Mandelbaum, "Is Major War Obsolete?"; and Van Evera, 
"Primed for Peace." For evidence that they are influenced by the pacifier argument, see Art, "Why Western Europe," esp. pp. 4 -9, 35- 39; Michael Mandelbaum, The Dawn of Peace in 
Europe (New York: Twentieth Century Fund, 1996), esp. chaps. 1, 9; Van Evera, "Primed for 
Peace," pp. 16, 54- 55; and Stephen Van Evera, "Why Europe Matters, Why the Third Wo rld 
Doesn't: American Grand Strategy after the Cold War," Journal of Strategic Studies 13, No. 2 
(June 1990), pp. 9- 11. 
57. President Clinton put this point well when he noted that although there are good reasons 
to be critical of American foreign policy i n the twentieth century, "no one suggests that we ever 
sought territorial advantage." President William J. Clinton, "Remarks to the American Society of 
Newspaper Editors Regarding the Situation in Kosovo," San Francisco, CA, April 15, 1999. 
58. On the diminished state of the Russian military, see Alexei G. Arbatov, "Military Reform 
in Russia: Dilemmas, Obstacles, and Prospects," International Security 22, No. 4 (Spring 1998), 
pp. 83 -134; Robert W. Duggleby, "The Disintegration of the Russian Arme d Forces," Journal of 
Slavic Studies 11, No. 2 (June 1998), pp. 1- 24; and Sergey Rogov, Military Reform and the 
Defense Budget of the Russian Federation (Alexandria, VA: Center for Naval Analyses, August 
1997). 
59. Charles Krauthammer, "The Unipolar Moment ," Foreign Affairs 70, No. 1 (Winter 1990-
91), pp. 23- 33; Michael Mastanduno, "Preserving the Unipolar Moment: Realist Theories and 
U.S. Grand Strategies after the Cold War," International Security 21, No. 4 (Spring 1997), pp. 
49-88; and William C. Wohlfor th, "The Stability of a Unipolar World," International Security 24, 
No. 1 (Summer 1999), pp. 5 -41. 
60. For an interesting discussion of this point, see Samuel P. Huntington, "The Lonely 
Superpower," Foreign Affairs 78, No. 2 (March -April 1999), pp. 35- 49. Also see Christopher 
Layne, "The Unipolar Illusion: Why New Great Powers Will Rise," International Security 17, No. 
4 (Spring 1993), pp. 5 -51; and Kenneth N. Waltz, "The Emerging Structure of International 
Politics," International Security 18, No. 2 (Fall 1993), pp. 44- 79. Wohlforth, who makes the most 
compelling case for unipolarity, defines it as "a structure in which one state's capabilities are too great to be coun terbalanced." Wohlforth, "Stability," p. 9. Although I agree with that definition, I 
take issue with his assessment that China and Russia do not have the wherewithal to stand up 
to the United States. 
61. On what defines a great power, see Chapter 1. 
62. China and Russia have been on friendly terms in recent years, and both have made 
clear their displeasure with different aspects of American foreign policy. But they have not 
formed a serious balancing coalition against the United States, and few believe that they will do 
so in the future. See Jennifer Anderson, The Limits of Sino- Russian Strategic Partnership, 
Adelphi Paper No. 315 (London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, December 1997); 
Mark Buries, Chinese Policy toward Russia and the Central Asian Republics (Santa Monica, 
CA: RAND Corporation, 1999); and "Can a Bear Love a Drag on?" Economist, April 26, 1997, 
pp. 19 -21. Also, there is a potential source of serious trouble between China and Russia: large -
scale illegal immigration from China into Russia for the past decade, which could lead to ethnic 
conflict or territorial dispute s. See David Hale, "Is Asia's High Growth Era Over?" National 
Interest, No. 47 (Spring 1997), p. 56; and Simon Winchester, "On the Edge of Empires: Black 
Dragon River," National Geographic, February 2000, pp. 7 -33. 
63. Many argue that it is difficult to im agine security competition, much less war, between 
France and Germany. The current happy situation, however, did not come about because those 
longtime rivals, who fought wars against each other in 1870 -71, 1914- 18, and 1940, suddenly 
learned to like and tr ust each other in 1945. The presence of a large American army in Western 
Europe since World War II has made it almost impossible for France and Germany to fight with each other and thus has eliminated the main cause of fear between them. In essence, hierar chy 
replaces anarchy in areas directly controlled by U.S. forces. Josef Joffe puts the point well: "Only the permanent intrusion of the United States into the affairs of the Continent changed the 
terms of state interaction to the point where West Europeans no longer had to conduct their 
business in the brooding shadow of violence. By promising to protect Western Europe against 
others and against itself, the United States swept aside the rules of the self -help game that had 
governed and regularly brought gri ef to Europe in centuries past." Joffe, "Europe's American 
Pacifier," p. 72. 
64. "Excerpts from Pentagon's Plan: 'Prevent the Re- Emergence of a New Rival,'" New York 
Times, March 8, 1992. Also see Patrick E. Tyler, "U.S. Strategy Plan Calls for Insuring No 
Rivals Develop," New York Times, March 8, 1992. 
65. See Eugene Gholz, Daryl G. Press, and Harvey M. Sapolsky, "Come Home, America: 
The Strategy of Restraint in the Face of Temptation," International Security 21, No. 4 (Spring 
1997), pp. 5- 48; and Christopher Layne, "From Preponderance to Offshore Balancing: 
America's Future Grand Strategy," International Security 22, No.l (Summer 1997), pp. 86 -124. 
66. The Clinton administration certainly bought this view. Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright, for example, told the U.S. Senate that "European stability depends in large measure on 
continued American engagement and leadership. And as history attests, European stability is 
also vital to our national interests. As a result we will remain engaged." Madeleine Albright, 
prepared statement before the U.S. Senate Foreign Relations Committee, January 8, 1997. This 
perspective also enjoys broad support among academics. For example, see Art, "Why Western 
Europe"; Bertram, Europe in the Balance; Mandelbaum, Dawn of Peace ; Van Evera, "Why 
Europe Matters"; and Barry R. Posen and Andrew L. Ross, "Competing Visions for U.S. Grand 
Strategy," International Security 21, No. 3 (Winter 1996- 97), pp. 5 -53, esp. note 14. Also see 
Mark S. Sheetz, "Exit Strategies: American Grand Desi gns for Postwar European Security," 
Security Studies 8, No. 4 (Summer 1999), pp. 1 -3, which describes the broad appeal of this 
perspective. 
67. Eugene Gholz and Daryl G. Press, "Economic Externalities of Foreign Wars," 
manuscript accepted for publication i n Security Studies. 
68. David M. Kennedy, Over Here: The First World War and American Society (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1980), chap. 6. Japan's economy also benefited significantly from 
sitting out the fighting in World War I. 
69. Gholz and Press, "Economic Externalities." This analysis assumes that a great -power 
war in Europe or Northeast Asia would be protracted and involve virtually all of the regional 
powers —i.e., a central war like World War I. However, a future great -power war, like many of 
those in the past, might be short or might involve only two major states. A more limited conflict of this sort would surely have less effect (positive or negative) on the U.S. economy than would 
a central war. 
70. See U.S. Congress, Hous e Committee on International Relations, Oil Fields as Military 
Objectives: A Feasibility Study, 94th Cong., 1st sess. (Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, August 21, 1975), esp. Annex A. 
71. See James A. Baker III, The Politics of Diplomacy: R evolution, War and Peace, 1989-
1992 (New York: Putnam, 1995), pp. 335 -39; and George Bush and Brent Scowcroft, A World 
Transformed (New York: Knopf, 1998), pp. 399- 400. 
72. See Lawrence S. Kaplan, The Long Entanglement: NATO's First Fifty Years (Westport, 
CT: Praeger, 1999); and Robert B. McCalla, "Why NATO Survives," International Organization 
50, No. 3 (Summer 1996), pp. 456- 61, 470 -72. 
73. See Peter W. Rodman,' Drifting Apart? Trends in U.S.. -European Relations 
(Washington, DC: Nixon Center, 1999); and S tephen M. Walt, "The Ties That Fray: Why Europe 
and America Are Drifting Apart," National Interest, No. 54 (Winter 1998 -99), pp. 3 -11. Also see 
Robert D. Blackwill and Michael Stunner, eds., Allies Divided: Transatlantic Policies for the Greater Middle Eas t (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997); Roger Cohen, "Storm Clouds over 
U.S.-Europe Relations," New York Times, March 26, 2001; Roger Cohen, "To European Eyes, 
It's America the Ugly," New York Times, May 7, 2001; John Deutch, Arnold Kanter, and Brent 
Scowcroft , "Saving NATO's Foundation," Foreign Affairs 78, No. 6 (November -December 1999), 
pp. 54 -67; Philip H. Gordon, "Recasting the Atlantic Alliance," Survival 38, No. 1 (Spring 1996), 
pp. 32 -57; Camille Grand, "Missile Defense: The View from the Other Side of the Atlantic," Arms 
Control Today 30, No. 7 (September 2000), pp. 12- 18; and Lawrence F. Kaplan, "Surrender," 
New Republic, November 20, 2000, pp. 12 -13. 
74. The negative consequences for NATO of the Kosovo war are captured in the following 
comment from Der Spiegel: "After ten weeks of war in Yugoslavia, one thing has become clear 
across Europe: the hegemony, of the U.S. and NATO is lim ited as a model for the future." 
Quoted in Jeffrey Gedmin, "Continental Drift: A Europe United in Spirit against the United 
States," New Republic, June 28, 1999, p. 23. Also see the comments of Adm. Leighton W. 
Smith, Jr., a former commander of NATO forces in southern Europe, in George C. Wilson, "Kosovo May Be NATO's Last Hurrah," National Journal 32, No. 16 (April 15, 2000) , pp. 1218-
19. Friction between the United States and its European allies over the Balkans also flared dur -
ing the 2000 presidential campaign. See Michael R. Gordon, "Bush Would Stop U.S. Peacekeeping in Balkan Fights," New York Times, October 21, 2000; and Steven Erlanger, 
"Europeans Say Bush's Pledge to Pull Out of Balkans Could Split NATO," New York Times, October 25, 2000. 
75. For example, Japan, which has the second largest defense budget in the world, is 
developing its own spy satellites, against Amer ican wishes. Moreover, each house of Japan's 
Diet has established a commission to review its pacifist constitu tion, a move widely seen as a 
victory for Japan's nationalists. An important defense official, Shingo Nishimura, was forced to resign in October 1999, because he suggested that Japan develop its own nuclear deterrent. 
See "Japan's Naval Power: Responding to New Challenges," International Institute for .Strategic Studies' Strategic Comments 6, No. 8 (October 2000); "Japan Reviews Pacifism," London 
Times, January 21, 2000; Clay Chandler, "Japanese Official Forced to Quit after Endorsing 
Nuclear Arms," Washington Post, October 21, 1999; Howard French, "Japan Signals Peaceful 
Intentions, but Reaffirms Armament Plans," New York Times, April 28, 2001; and "Satellite 
Program Endorsed as a Response to N. Korean Rocket," Chicago Tribune, November 7, 1998. Also see Christensen, "China, the U.S. -Japan Alliance," pp. 74- 80; and Milton Ezrati, Kawari: 
How Japan's Economic and Cultural Transformation Will Alter t he Balance of Power among 
Nations (Reading, MA: Perseus, 1999), chaps. 7- 8. 
76. The phrase "reluctant sheriff" is from Richard N. Haas, The Reluctant Sheriff: The United 
States after the Cold War (New York: Council on Foreign Relations Press, 1997). An important 
source of evidence of America's waning commitment to Europe and Northeast Asia is John E. 
Rielly, ed., American Public Opinion and U.S. Foreign Policy 1999 (Chicago: Chicago Council 
on Foreign Relations, 1999). The study finds, for example, that onl y 44 percent of the public and 
58 percent of U.S. leaders think that "defending our allies' security" is a "very important" goal. 
Furthermore, if Russia invaded Poland, a NATO member, a mere 28 percent of the American 
public favors using U.S. ground troops to defend Poland. Ibid., pp. 16, 26. Also see James M. 
Lindsay, "The New Apathy: How an Uninterested Public Is Reshaping Foreign Policy," Foreign 
Affairs 79, No. 5 (September -October 2000), pp. 2- 8. 
77. See Steve Glain, "Fearing China's Plans and a U.S. Departure, Asians Rebuild Forces," 
Wall Street Journal, November 13, 1997; and Manning and Przystup, "Asia's Transition 
Diplomacy," pp. 48- 49. 
78. See Ted Galen Carpenter, "Roiling Asia: U.S. Coziness with China Upsets the 
Neighbors," Foreign Affairs 77', No. 6 (November -December 1998), pp. 2 -6. The United States 
raised suspicions about its reliability earlier in 1996 when it said that its securi ty guarantee to 
Japan did not apply to any crisis arising over the Senkaku/Diaoyutai Islands, which both China and Japan claim. See Yoichi Funabashi, Alliance Adrift (New York: Council on Foreign 
Relations Press, 1999), pp. 401 -15. 
79. It is apparent from this discussion that even if I am wrong and the United States 
assumes the role of peacekeeper in Europe and Northeast Asia, there is still likely to be 
fundamental change in the power structures in those regions. In particular, America's allies, 
especially Germany and Japan, are not likely to remain wards of the United States, but instead 
are likely to establish themselves as great powers. 
80. These population numbers are from J. David Singer and Melvin Small, National Material 
Capabilities Data, 1816 -1915 (Ann Arbor, MI: Inter -University Consortium for Political and Social 
Research, February 1993). Jonathan Adelman writes that the Russians had a 2.7:1 advantage in 1914 (180 million vs. 67.5 mil lion) and a 2.4:1 advantage in 1941 (187 million vs. 78 million). 
See Jonathan R. Adelman, Revolution, Armies, and War: A Political History (Boulder, CO: 
Lynne Rienner, 1985), pp. 105, 229. 
81. These population figures are from Table 10.2; and The Military Balance 1988- 1989 
(London: International Institute for Strateg ic Studies, 1988), p. 33. 
82. These figures are drawn from Tables 3.3 and 10.2. 
83. For a detailed breakdown of the size and structure of the German and Russian armies, 
see International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance, 2000- 2001 (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2000), pp. 61- 62, 120 -21. There is evi dence that the Russian army will 
shrink further in the near future, possibly going as low as 220,000. See Simon Saradzhyan, 
"Lopsided Army Cuts Show Kremlin Fears," Moscow Times, September 29, 2000. Germany is 
also considering cutbacks, although its reductions would be smaller than Russia's. See Cecilie Rohwedder, "Germany to Modernize Military, Trim Defense Spending by 2.5 Percent," Wall 
Street Journal, June 15, 2000. 
84. On German thinki ng about nuclear weapons during the Cold War, see Marc 
Trachtenberg, A Constructed Peace: The Making of the European Settlement, 1945- 1963 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999), pp. 203/230 -40, 398. 
85. As noted, the Soviet Union had about 285 million people in 1987, whereas Russia's 
present population is about 147 million. 
86. There was considerable speculation in the early 1990s that Japan would grow powerful 
and replace the Soviet Union as America's main rival in Northeast Asia. See George F riedman 
and Meredith LeBard, The Coming War with Japan (New York: St. Martin's, 1991); and Samuel 
P. Huntington, "Why International Primacy Matters," International Security 17, No. 4 (Spring 
1993), pp. 68- 83. On why Japan is unlikely to become a highly agg ressive state, see Robert S. 
Ross, "The Geography of the Peace: East Asia in the Twenty -first Century," International 
Security 23, No. 4 (Spring 1999), pp. 81 -118. 
87. As noted in Table 10.1, Japan has 126 million people, and China has 1.24 billion. The 
United Nations forecasts that Japan's population will shrink to roughly 100 million by 2050, while 
China's population will increase to about 1.5 billion by that date. "Emerging Market Indicators," 
Economist, February 1, 1997, p. 108. 
88. As noted in Table 10.1, Russia has 147 million people, China has 1.24 bil lion. The 
United Nations forecasts that Russia's population will shrink to roughly 120 million by 2050, 
while China's population will increase to about 1.5 billion by that date. "Emerging Market 
Indicators," Economist, February 1, 1997, p. 108. 
89. See Steven E. Miller, "Russian National Interests," in Robert D. Blackwill and Sergei 
Karaganov, eds., Damage Limitat ion or Crisis? Russia and the Outside World, CSIA Studies in 
International Security (Washington, DC: Brassey's, 1994), pp. 77- 106; and Sergey Rogov, 
Security Concerns of the New Russia, vol. 1, The Challenges of Defending Russia, Occasional 
Paper (Alexandr ia, VA: Center for Naval Analyses, July 1995). 
90. See Zalmay Khalilzad et al., The United States and a Rising China: Strategic and 
Military Implications (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1999); and Michael D. Swaine and 
Ashley J. Tellis, Interpreting C hina's Grand Strategy: Past, Present, and Future (Santa Monica, 
CA: RAND Corporation, 2000). 
91. For a generally optimistic assessment of the future of China's economy, see World 
Bank, China 2020: Development Challenges in the New Century (Washington, DC: World Bank, 
1997). For more pessimistic assessments, see the articles in "The FPRI Conference on China's 
Economy," Orbis43, No, 2 (Spring 1999), pp. 173 -294; and Nicholas R. Lardy, China's 
Unfinished Economic Revolution (Washington, DC: Brookings Instituti on Press, 1998). Also see 
Richard K. Belts and Thomas J. Christensen, "China: Getting the Questions Right," National 
Interest, No. 62 (Winter 2000- 2001), pp. 17 -29. 
92. Hong Kong's per capita gross national product (GNP) in 1998 dollars is equal to about 
80 percent of U.S. per capita GNP ($23,660 vs. $29,240). See World Bank Atlas 2000 
(Washington, DC: World Bank, April 2000), pp. 42 -43. But China has roughly five times as many 
people as the United States and is projected to maintain that advantage over the first half of the 
new century. Also see Table 10.3 for some alternative scenarios involving a wealthy China.